But, well, he’s a scholar. He’s better off studying a project and writing notes than he is giving commands. So, that only leaves me. I’m just doing the job that everyone else is too busy to do.” Beldre sat quietly for a moment, then finally took a sip of her tea. “Ah,” she said. “It’s good!” “The Lord Ruler’s own brew, for all we know,” Spook said. “We found it down here, with the rest of this stuff.” “This is why you came, isn’t it?” Beldre asked, nodding to the cavern. “I wondered why your emperor cared about Urteau. We haven’t really been an important force in the world since the Venture line moved its center of power to Luthadel.” Spook nodded. “This is part of it, though Elend is also worried about the rebellion up here. It’s dangerous, having a foe who is slaughtering noblemen controlling one of the major cities just a short distance north of Luthadel. That’s all I can really tell you, though. Most of the time, I feel like I’m still just a bystander in all of this. Vin and Elend, they’re the ones who really know what’s going on. To them, I’m the guy they could spare to spend months spying in Urteau while they did important work in the South.” “They are wrong to treat you so,” Beldre said. “No, it’s all right,” Spook said. “I’ve kind of enjoyed being up here. I feel like I’ve been able to do something, finally.” She nodded. After a short time, she set down her cup, wrapping her arms around her knees. “What are they like?” she asked. “I’ve heard so many stories. They say that Emperor Venture always wears white, and that the ash refuses to stick to him! He can quell an army just by looking at them. And his wife, the Survivor’s heir. Mistborn…” Spook smiled. “Elend is a forgetful scholar—twice as bad as Sazed ever was. He gets lost in his books and forgets about meetings he himself called. He only dresses with any sense of fashion because a Terriswoman bought him a new wardrobe. War has changed him some, but on the inside, I think he’s still just a dreamer caught in a world with too much violence. “And Vin… well, she really is different. I’ve never been sure what to make of her. Sometimes, she seems as frail as a child. And then she kills an Inquisitor. She can be fascinating and frightening at the same time. I tried to court her once.” “Really?” Beldre said, perking up. Spook smiled. “I gave her a handkerchief. I heard that’s how you do it in noble society.” “Only if you’re a romantic,” Beldre said, smiling wistfully. “Well, I gave her one,” Spook said. “But I don’t think she knew what I meant by it. And, of course, once she did figure it out, she turned me down. I’m not sure what I was thinking, trying to court her. I mean, I’m just Spook. Quiet, incomprehensible, forgettable Spook.” He closed his eyes. What am I saying? Women didn’t want to hear men talk about how insignificant they were. He’d heard that much. I shouldn’t have come to talk to her. I should have just gone about, giving orders. Looking like I was in charge. The damage had been done, however. She knew the truth about him. He sighed, opening his eyes. “I don’t think you’re forgettable,” Beldre said. “Of course, I’d be more likely to think fondly of you if you were to let me go.” Spook smiled. “Eventually. I promise.” “Are you going to use me against him?” Beldre asked. “Threaten to kill me if he doesn’t give in?” “Threats like that are hollow if you know you’ll never do what you say,” Spook said. “Honestly, Beldre, I’m not going to hurt you. In fact, I’ve got a feeling you’ll be safer here than back in your brother’s palace.” “Please don’t kill him, Spook,” Beldre said. “Maybe… maybe you can help him somehow, help him see that he’s being too extreme.” Spook nodded. “I’ll… try.” “Do you promise?” she said. “All right,” Spook said. “I promise to at least try to save your brother. If I can.” “And the city too.” “And the city,” Spook said. “Trust me. We’ve done this before—the transition will go smoothly.” Beldre nodded, and she actually seemed to believe him. What kind of woman is still able to trust people after everything she’s been through? If she’d been Vin, she would have stabbed him in the back at the first opportunity, and that would have probably been the right thing to do. Yet, this girl just continued to trust. It was like finding a beautiful plant growing alone in a field of burnt ash. “Once we’re done, maybe you could introduce me to the emperor and empress,” Beldre said. “They sound like interesting people.” “I’ll never argue with that statement,” Spook said. “Elend and Vin… well, they’re certainly interesting. Interesting people with heavy burdens. Sometimes, I wish I were powerful enough to do important works like them.” Beldre laid a hand on his arm, and he glanced down, a bit surprised. What? “Power can be a terrible thing, Spook,” she said quietly. “I’m… not pleased with what it’s done to my brother. Don’t wish so hard for it.” Spook met her eyes, then nodded and rose. “If you need anything, ask Sazed. He’ll see to your comforts.” She looked up. “Where are you going?” “To be seen.”
