Sometimes, he didn’t feel justified in having more power than she—after all, he’d been an Allomancer for far less time. Vin picked up her lantern, and they moved into the now-open room. Like the other two Elend had seen, this cavern was enormous. It extended into the distance, their lantern’s light making only a faint dent in the blackness. Fatren gasped in wonder as he joined them in the doorway. The room was filled with shelves. Hundreds of them. Thousands of them. “What is it?” Fatren asked. “Food,” Elend said. “And basic supplies. Medicines, cloth, water.” “So much,” Fatren said. “Here, all along…” “Go get more men,” Elend said. “Soldiers. We’ll need them to guard the entrance, to keep people from breaking in and stealing the contents.” Fatren’s face hardened. “This place belongs to my people.” “My people, Fatren,” Elend said, watching Vin walk into the room, bearing the light with her. “This city is mine, now, as are its contents.” “You came to rob us,” Fatren accused. “Just like the bandits who tried to take the city last year.” “No,” Elend said, turning toward the soot-stained man. “I came to conquer you. There’s a difference.” “I don’t see one.” Elend gritted his teeth to keep himself from snapping at the man—the fatigue, the draining effect of leading an empire that seemed doomed—put him on edge so often lately. No, he told himself. Men like Fatren need more than another tyrant. They need someone to look up to. Elend approached the man, and intentionally didn’t use emotional Allomancy on him. Soothing was effective in many situations, but it wore off quickly. It was not a method to make permanent allies. “Lord Fatren,” Elend said. “I want you to think carefully about what you’re arguing for. What would happen if I did leave you? With this much food, this much wealth down here? Can you trust your people not to break in, your soldiers not to try selling some of this to other cities? What happens when the secret of your food supply gets out? Will you welcome the thousands of refugees who will come? Will you protect them, and this cavern, against the raiders and bandits who will follow?” Fatren fell silent. Elend laid a hand on the man’s shoulder. “I meant what I said above, Lord Fatren. Your people fought well—I was very impressed. They owe their survival today to you—your foresight, your training. Mere hours ago, they assumed they would be slaughtered by koloss. Now, they are not only safe, but under the protection of a much larger army. “Don’t fight this. You’ve struggled well, but it is time to have allies. I won’t lie to you—I’m going to take the contents of this cavern, whether you resist me or not. However, I intend to give you the protection of my armies, the stability of my food supplies, and my word of honor that you can continue to rule your people under me. We need to work together, Lord Fatren. That’s the only way any of us are going to survive the next few years.” Fatren looked up. “You’re right, of course,” he said. “I’ll go get those men you asked for, my lord.” “Thank you,” Elend said. “And, if you have anyone who can write, send them to me. We’ll need to catalogue what we have down here.” Fatren nodded, then left. “Once, you couldn’t do things like that,” Vin said from a short distance away, her voice echoing in the large cavern. “Like what?” “Give a man such forceful commands,” she said. “Take control away from him. You’d have wanted to give these people a vote on whether or not they should join your empire.” Elend looked back at the doorway. He stood silently for a moment. He hadn’t used emotional Allomancy, and yet he felt as if he’d bullied Fatren anyway. “Sometimes, I feel like a failure, Vin. There should be another way.” “Not right now, there isn’t,” Vin said, walking up to him, putting a hand on his arm. “They need you, Elend. You know that they do.” He nodded. “I know it. I just can’t help thinking that a better man would have found a way to make the will of the people work along with his rule.” “You did,” she said. “Your parliamentary assembly still rules in Luthadel, and the kingdoms you reign over maintain basic rights and privileges for the skaa.” “Compromises,” Elend said. “They only get to do what they want as long as I don’t disagree with them.” “It’s enough. You have to be realistic, Elend.” “When my friends and I met together, I was the one who spoke of the perfect dreams, of the great things we’d accomplish. I was always the idealist.” “Emperors don’t have that luxury,” Vin said quietly. Elend looked at her, then sighed, turning away.
