Wellen leaned against his spear, watching those mists again. Rittle—his companion guard—said they weren’t dangerous. But, Rittle hadn’t seen what they could do. What they could reveal. Wellen figured that he had survived because he respected them. That, and because he didn’t think too hard about the things he had seen.
“You think Skiff and Jaston will be late to relieve us again?” Wellen asked, trying again to start a conversation.
Rittle just grunted. “Dunno, Wells.” Rittle never did care for small talk.
“I think maybe one of us should go see,” Wellen said, eyeing the mist. “You know, ask if they’ve come in yet…” He trailed off.
Something was out there.
Lord Ruler! he thought, cringing back. Not again!
But, no attack came from the mists. Instead, a dark figure strode forward. Rittle perked up, lowering his spear. “Halt!”
A man walked from the mists, wearing a deep black cloak, arms at his sides, hood up. His face, however, was visible. Wellen frowned. Something about this man looked familiar…
Rittle gasped, then fell to his knees, clutching something at his neck—the pendant of a silver spear that he always wore. Wellen frowned. Then he noticed the scars on this newcomer’s arms.
Lord Ruler! Wellen thought in shock, realizing where he’d seen this man’s face. It had been in a painting, one of many available in the city, that depicted the Survivor of Hathsin.
“Rise,” the stranger said, speaking in a benevolent voice.
Rittle stood on shaking feet. Wellen backed away, uncertain whether to be awed or terrified, and feeling a little of both.
“I have come to commend your faith,” the Survivor said.
“My lord…” Rittle said, his head still bowed.
“Also,” Kelsier said, raising a finger. “I have come to tell you I do not approve of how this city is being run. My people are sick, they starve, and they die.”
“My lord,” Rittle said, “there is not enough food, and there have been riots seizing that which was stockpiled. My lord, and the mists kill! Please, why have you sent them to kill us!”
“I did no such thing,” Kelsier said. “I know that food is scarce, but you must share what you have and have hope. Tell me of the man who rules this city.”
“King Penrod?” Rittle asked. “He rules for Emperor Elend Venture, who is away at war.”
“Lord Elend Venture? And he approves of how this city is being treated?” Kelsier looked angry. Wellen cringed.
“No, my lord!” Rittle said, shaking. “I…”
“Lord Penrod is mad,” Wellen found himself saying.
The Survivor turned toward him.
“Wells, you shouldn’t…” Rittle said, but then trailed off, the Survivor shooting him a stern look.
“Speak,” the Survivor said to Wellen.
“He speaks to the air, my lord,” Wellen said, averting his eyes. “Talks to himself—claims that he can see the Lord Ruler standing beside him. Penrod… he’s given lots of strange orders, lately. Forcing the skaa to fight each other for food, claiming that only the strong should survive. He kills those who disagree with him. That kind of thing.”
“I see,” the Survivor said.
Surely he knows this already, Wellen thought. Why bother asking?
“Where is my Heir?” the Survivor asked. “The Hero of Ages, Vin.”
“The Lady Empress?” Wellen asked. “She’s with the emperor.”
“Where?”
“Nobody knows for certain, my lord,” Rittle said, still shaking. “She hasn’t returned in a long time. My sergeant says that she and the emperor are fighting in the South, fighting koloss. But I’ve heard other men say the army went to the west.”
“That’s not very helpful,” Kelsier said.
Wellen perked up, remembering something.
“What?” the Survivor asked, apparently noticing Wellen’s change in posture.
“An army troop stopped by the city a few months ago,” Wellen said, feeling proud. “They kept it quiet, but I was in the group that helped them resupply. Lord Breeze was with them, and he spoke of meeting up with others of your crew.”
“Where?” Kelsier asked. “Where were they going?”
“North,” Wellen said. “To Urteau. That must be where the emperor is, my lord. The Northern Dominance is in rebellion. He must have taken his armies to quell it.”
The Survivor nodded. “Very well,” he said. He turned as if to go, then paused, looking back. “Pass what news you can,” he said. “There isn’t much time left. Tell the people that when the mists leave, they should immediately find shelter. A place underground, if possible.”
Wellen paused, then nodded. “The caverns,” he said. “Where you trained your army?”
“That will do,” Kelsier said. “Farewell.”
The Survivor disappeared into the mists.

TenSoon left the gates of Keep Venture behind, running off into the mists. He could, perhaps, have gotten himself into the building. However, he wasn’t certain how well his imitation of the Survivor would hold up under closer scrutiny.
He didn’t know how reliable the two guards’ information was. However, he had no better leads. Other people he had talked to in the night hadn’t been able to provide any information about the army’s movements. Evidently, Vin and Elend had been gone from Luthadel for quite some time.
He rushed back to the patch of earth behind the warehouse where he’d found Kelsier’s body. He knelt in the darkness, uncovering the sack he’d stuffed with bones. He needed to get the dog’s body back and head north. Hopefully he would—
“You there!” a voice said.
TenSoon looked up reflexively. A man stood in the doorway of the warehouse, looking through the mists at TenSoon. A lantern flared to life behind him, revealing a group of people who had apparently taken up residence inside of the holy place.
Uh, oh… TenSoon thought as those at the front adopted shocked expressions.
“My lord!” the man in front said, quickly kneeling in his sleeping robe. “You’ve returned!”
TenSoon stood, stepping carefully to hide the sack of bones behind him. “I have,” he said.
“We knew that you would,” the man said as others began to whisper and cry out behind him. Many fell to their knees. “We stayed in this place, praying for you to come give us counsel. The king is mad, my lord! What do we do?”
TenSoon was tempted to expose himself as a kandra, but looking into their hopeful eyes, he found that he could not. Besides, perhaps he could do some good. “Penrod has been corrupted by Ruin,” he said. “The thing that seeks to destroy the world. You must gather the faithful and escape this city before Penrod kills you all.”
“My lord, where should we go?”
TenSoon hesitated. Where? “There are a pair of guards at the front of Keep Venture. They know of a place. Listen to them. You must get to a place underground. Do you understand?”
“Yes, lord,” the man said. Behind, more and more people were edging forward, straining to catch a glimpse of TenSoon. He bore their scrutiny with some nervousness. Finally, he bid them be careful, then fled into the night.
He found an empty building and quickly changed back to the dog’s bones before anyone else could see him. When he was done, he eyed the Survivor’s bones, feeling a strange… reverence.
Don’t be silly, he told himself. They’re just bones, like hundreds of other sets you’ve used. Still, it seemed foolish to leave such a potentially powerful tool behind. He carefully packed them into the sack he’d pilfered, then—using paws he’d created to have more dexterity than those of a real wolfhound—he tied the sack on his back.
After that, TenSoon left the city by the northern gate, running at full wolfhound speed. He would go to Urteau and hope that he was on the right path.
