FINAL EMPIRE: The empire established by the Lord Ruler. The name came from his certainty that since he was immortal, it would be the last empire the world would ever know. FLARE (ALLOMANTIC): To draw a little extra power from an Allomantic metal at the expense of making it burn faster. GENERATIONS, KANDRA: The kandra people are divided into generations, based on when they were created. The First Generation is made up of the original kandra and still survives. Each century after them, the Lord Ruler allowed another group of kandra to be created, and they were named the Second Generation, the Third Generation, and so forth. GNEORNDIN: Ashweather Cett’s only son. GORADEL, CAPTAIN: Once a soldier in the Luthadel Garrison, Goradel was guarding the palace when Vin decided to infiltrate and kill the Lord Ruler. Vin convinced him to switch sides, and he later led Elend through the palace to try and rescue her. He is now an officer in Elend’s army. HADDEK: Leader of the First Generation of kandra. HAM: A Thug on Kelsier’s crew, now a general in Elend’s army. Known for his enjoyment of philosophical puzzles, and for wearing only a vest no matter what the temperature. HAMMOND: Ham’s real name. HATHSIN: See Pits of Hathsin. HAZEKILLER: A soldier with no Allomantic or Feruchemical powers who is trained to fight and kill Allomancers. HERO OF AGES, THE: The prophecied savior of the Terris people. It was foretold that he would come, take the power at the Well of Ascension, then be selfless enough to give it up in order to save the world from the Deepness. Alendi was thought to be the Hero of Ages, but was killed before he could complete his quest. Vin followed in his footsteps, and got further, taking the power, then giving it up. The prophecies, however, proved to be falsified—a ruse intended to allow a force named Ruin to escape imprisonment. (See also Ruin.) HOID: A mystery yet to be solved. HOMELAND, KANDRA: The cavern complex that the kandra use as their secret home. It is known to no human other than the Lord Ruler (who is now dead). Kandra who serve well in Contracts are allowed periods of rest in the Homeland. INQUISITOR, STEEL: A group of strange priests who served the Lord Ruler. They have spikes driven completely through their heads—point-first through the eyes—yet continue to live. They were fanatically devoted to him, and were used primarily to hunt out and kill skaa with Allomantic powers. They have the abilities of a Mistborn granted to them via Hemalurgy, and some other powers gained by that art as well. IRONEYES: Marsh’s nickname when he was a member of the crew, before he became an Inquisitor. IRONPULL: Pulling on a metal when Allomantically burning iron. This Pull exerts a force on the metal item, yanking it directly toward the Allomancer. If the metallic item, known as an “anchor,” is heavier than the Allomancer, he or she will instead be Pulled toward it. JANARLE, KING: Once Straff Venture’s second-in-command, Janarle was forced to swear allegiance to Elend Venture. He now rules the Northern Dominance on Elend’s behalf. JASTES LEKAL: Heir to the Lekal house title and one of Elend’s former friends. He and Elend often discussed politics and philosophy along with Telden. Jastes gathered an army of koloss and marched on Luthadel during the siege begun by Straff and Cett, then lost control of them. Elend executed Jastes for the death and destruction he caused. KANDRA: A race of creatures who can ingest a person’s dead body, then reproduce that body with their own flesh. As relatives of mistwraiths, kandra have no bones, so they keep and use the bones of the person they imitate. Natural spies, they serve Contracts with mankind—which must be paid for with atium. Kandra are immortal. (See also Homeland and Generations.) KANPAAR: Foremost of the Second Generation of kandra. KEEPER (TERRIS): Often used loosely as another term for a Feruchemist. The Keepers were actually an organization of Feruchemists dedicated to discovering, then memorizing, all of the knowledge and religions that existed before the Ascension. The Lord Ruler hunted them to near-extinction, forcing them to remain hidden. After the Collapse, they began teaching and revealing their knowledge. However, they were attacked by the Inquisitors about the time of the siege of Luthadel, and are all presumed dead, save Sazed. KELL: Kelsier’s nickname. KELSIER: The most famous thieving crewleader in the Final Empire, Kelsier raised a rebellion of skaa and overthrew the Lord Ruler, but was killed in the process. He was Mistborn, and was Vin’s teacher. His death spawned a religion known as the Church of the Survivor. KHLENNIUM: An ancient kingdom that existed before the rise of the Final Empire. It was Alendi’s homeland. KOLOSS: A race of bestial warriors created by the Lord Ruler during his Ascension, then used by him to conquer the world. KREDIK SHAW: The Lord Ruler’s palace in Luthadel. It means “the Hill of a Thousand Spires” in the old Terris language. KWAAN: A Terris scholar before the Collapse. He was a Worldbringer, and was the first to mistake Alendi for the Hero of Ages. He later changed his mind, betraying his former friend by recruiting Rashek to stop him. LADRIAN: Breeze’s real name. LEKAL, KING: A distant relative of Jastes Lekal, King Audil Lekal took power over Jastes’s kingdom after the siege of Luthadel. He has slowly lost most of that kingdom to banditry and koloss incursions. LESTIBOURNES: Spook’s real name. LLAMAS, MISTBORN: Brandon’s former writing group, who helped and advised on all three Mistborn books. Mistborn Llamas chew various kinds of plants to gain super-llaman powers. T-shirts can be found on the Web site, if you know where to look. LORD RULER: The emperor who ruled the Final Empire for a thousand years. He was once named Rashek, and was a Terris servant who was hired by Alendi. He killed Alendi, however, and went to the Well of Ascension in his place, and there took the power and Ascended. He was finally killed by Vin, but not before warning her that she was making a terrible mistake. LURCHER: A Misting who can burn iron. LUTHADEL: Capital of the Final Empire, and largest city in the land. Luthadel is known for its textiles, its forges, and its majestic noble keeps. It was nearly destroyed during the siege of Luthadel by rampaging koloss and is now ruled by King Penrod, one of the subject kings under Elend. MALATIUM: The metal discovered by Kelsier, often dubbed the Eleventh Metal. Nobody knows where he found it, or why he thought it could kill the Lord Ruler, but it is an alloy of atium and gold. Malatium eventually provided the clue Vin needed to defeat the Lord Ruler, as it allows an Allomancer to see a shadow from another person’s past. MARE: Kelsier’s wife, a friend of Sazed’s who was very active in the skaa rebellion before her death in the Pits of Hathsin. MELAAN: A kandra of the Seventh Generation. She was trained and “raised” by TenSoon. METALMIND: A piece of metal that a Feruchemist uses as a kind of battery, filling it with certain attributes that he or she can later withdraw. Specific metalminds are named after the different metals they are made of: tinmind, steelmind, etc. MIST: The strange, omnipresent fog that falls on the Final Empire every night. Thicker than a common fog, it swirls and churns about, almost as if it were alive. Just before Vin took the power at the Well of Ascension, the mists changed and began randomly killing people who went out in them. MISTBORN: An Allomancer who can burn all of the Allomantic metals. MISTCLOAK: A garment worn by many Mistborn as a mark of their station.
