Vin sat quietly in the dark cavern. Her back rested against the stone block that was the door to her prison. Beside her, on the rock floor, sat the dwindling lantern she’d brought into the massive room.
She’d Pushed and she’d Pulled, trying to force her way out. However, she’d soon realized that the broken stones she’d seen on the outside—the work project she’d assumed had been used to open the door—had actually had a different purpose. Yomen had apparently removed the metal plates inside the door, the ones that an Allomancer could Push or Pull on to open it. That left the door as simply a stone block. With duralumin-enhanced pewter, she should have been able to push even that open. Unfortunately, she found it difficult to get leverage on the floor, which sloped down away from the block. In addition, they must have done something to the hinges—or perhaps even piled up more rock against the other side—for she couldn’t get the door to budge.
She ground her teeth in frustration, sitting with her back to the stone door. Yomen had set an intentional trap for her. Had she and Elend been that predictable? Regardless, it was a brilliant move. Yomen knew he couldn’t fight them. So, instead, he’d simply captured Vin. It had the same effect, but without any of the risks. And she’d fallen right into the trap.
She’d searched the entire room, trying to find a way out, but had come up with nothing. Even worse, she’d located no hidden stock of atium. It was hard to tell with all the cans of food and other sources of metal, but her initial search hadn’t been promising.
“Of course it won’t be in here,” she muttered to herself. “Yomen wouldn’t have had time to pull out all of these cans, but if he were planning to trap me, he certainly would have removed the atium. I’m such an idiot!”
She leaned back, annoyed, frustrated, exhausted.
I hope Elend did what I said, Vin thought. If he had gotten captured too…
Vin knocked her head back against the obstinate stones, frustrated.
Something sounded in the darkness.
Vin froze, then quickly scrambled up into a crouch. She checked her metal reserves—she had plenty, for the moment.
I’m probably just—
It came again. A soft footfall. Vin shivered, realizing that she had only cursorily checked the chamber, and then she’d been searching for atium and other ways out. Could someone have been hiding inside the entire time?
She burned bronze, and felt him. An Allomancer. Mistborn. The one she had felt before; the man she had chased.
So that’s it! she thought. Yomen did want his Mistborn to fight us—but he knew he had to separate us first! She smiled, standing. It wasn’t a perfect situation, but it was better than thinking about the immobile door. A Mistborn she could beat, then hold hostage until they released her.
She waited until the man was close—she could tell by the beating of the Allomantic pulses that she hoped he didn’t know she could feel—then spun, kicking her lantern toward him. She jumped forward, guiding herself toward her enemy, who stood outlined by the lantern’s last flickers. He looked up at her as she soared through the air, her daggers out.
And she recognized his face.
Reen.
THE END OF PART THREE
