“So, you just came to die,” she finally said. “To explain what I’ve discovered. What I’ve felt.” “And then what? You come, proclaim dread news, then leave us to solve the problems on our own?” “That’s not fair, MeLaan,” he said. “I came to be the best kandra I know how.” (i) “Then fight!” He shook his head. “It’s true then,” she said. “The others of my generation, they said that you were broken by that last master of yours. The man Zane.” “He did not break me,” TenSoon said. “Oh?” MeLaan said. “And why did you return to the Homeland in that… body you were using?” “The dog’s bones?” TenSoon said. “Those weren’t given to me by Zane, but by Vin.” “So she broke you.” TenSoon exhaled quietly. How could he explain? On one hand, it seemed ironic to him that MeLaan—who intentionally wore a True Body that was inhuman—would find his use of a dog’s body so distasteful. Yet, he could understand. It had taken him quite some time to appreciate the advantages of those bones. He paused. But, no. He had not come to bring revolution. He had come to explain, to serve the interests of his people. He would do that by accepting his punishment, as a kandra should. And yet… There was a chance. A slim one. He wasn’t even certain he wanted to escape, but if there was an opportunity… “Those bones I wore,” TenSoon found himself saying. “You know where they are?” MeLaan frowned. “No. Why would you want them?” TenSoon shook his head. “I don’t,” he said, choosing his words carefully. “They were disgraceful! I was made to wear them for over a year, forced into the humiliating role of a dog. I would have discarded them, but I had no corpse to ingest and take, so I had to return here wearing that horrid body.” “You’re avoiding the real issue, TenSoon.” “There is no real issue, MeLaan,” he said, turning away from her. Whether or not his plan worked, he didn’t want the Seconds punishing her for associating with him. “I will not rebel against my people. Please, if you truly wish to help me, just let me be.” MeLaan hissed quietly, and he heard her stand. “You were once the greatest of us.” TenSoon sighed as she left. No, MeLaan. I was never great. Up until recently, I was the most orthodox of my generation, a conservative distinguished only by his hatred of humans (i). Now, I’ve become the greatest criminal in the history of our people, but I did it mostly by accident. That isn’t greatness. That’s just foolishness.
