4

This is actually what happened to Rashek, I believe. He pushed too hard. He tried to burn away the mists by moving the planet closer to the sun, but he moved it too far, making the world far too hot for the people who inhabited it.
The ashmounts were his solution to this. He had learned that shoving a planet around required too much precision, so instead he caused the mountains to erupt, spewing ash and smoke into the air. The thicker atmosphere made the world cooler, and turned the sun red.

SAZED, CHIEF AMBASSADOR OF THE NEW EMPIRE, studied the sheet of paper in front of him. The tenets of the Canzi people, it read. On the beauty of mortality, the importance of death, and the vital function of the human body as a partaker of the divine whole. The words were written in his own hand, copied out of one of his Feruchemical metalminds—where he had storages containing literally thousands of books. Beneath the heading, filling most of the sheet in cramped writing, he had listed the basic beliefs of the Canzi and their religion. Sazed settled back in his chair, holding up the paper and going over his notes one more time. He’d been focusing on this one religion for a good day now, and he wanted to make a decision about it. Even before the day’s study, he’d known much about the Canzi faith, for he’d studied it—along with all of the other pre-Ascension religions—for most of his life. Those religions had been his passion, the focus of all of his research. And then the day had come where he’d realized that all of his learning had been meaningless. The Canzi religion contradicts itself, he decided, making a notation with his pen at the side of the paper. It explains that all creatures are part of the “divine whole” and implies that each body is a work of art created by a spirit who decides to live in this world. However, one of its other tenets is that the evil are punished with bodies that do not function correctly. A distasteful doctrine, in Sazed’s mind. Those who were born with mental or physical deficiencies deserved compassion, perhaps pity, but not disdain. Besides, which of the religion’s ideals were true? That spirits chose and designed their bodies as they wished, or that they were punished by the body chosen for them? And what of the influence of lineage upon a child’s features and temperament? He nodded to himself, made a note at the bottom of the sheet of paper. Logically inconsistent. Obviously untrue. “What is that you have there?” Breeze asked. Sazed looked up. Breeze sat beside a small table, sipping his wine and eating grapes. He wore one of his customary nobleman’s suits, complete with a dark jacket, a bright red vest, and a dueling cane—with which he liked to gesture as he spoke. He’d gained back most of the weight he’d lost during Luthadel’s siege and its aftermath, and could reasonably be described as “portly” once again. Sazed looked down. He carefully placed the sheet alongside some hundred others inside his portfolio, then closed the cloth-wrapped board cover and did up the ties. “It is nothing of consequence, Lord Breeze,” he said. Breeze sipped quietly at his wine. “Nothing of consequence? You seem to always be puttering around with those sheets of yours. Whenever you have a free moment, you pull one of them out.” Sazed set the portfolio beside his chair. How to explain? Each of the sheets in the thick portfolio outlined one of the over three hundred different religions the Keepers had collected. Each and every one of those religions was now effectively “dead,” as the Lord Ruler had stamped them out very early in his reign, some thousand years before. One year ago, the woman Sazed loved had died. Now, he wanted to know… no, he had to know… if the religions of the world had answers for him. He would find the truth, or he would eliminate each and every faith. Breeze was still looking at him. “I would rather not talk about it, Lord Breeze,” Sazed said. “As you wish,” Breeze said, raising his cup. “Perhaps you could use your Feruchemist’s powers to listen in on the conversation happening in the next room…” “I do not think it would be polite to do so.” Breeze smiled. “My dear Terrisman—only you would come to conquer a city, then worry about being ‘polite’ to the dictator you’re threatening.” Sazed glanced down, feeling slightly abashed. But, he could not deny Breeze’s remarks. Though the two of them had brought no army with them to Lekal City, they had indeed come to conquer. They simply intended to do it with a piece of paper rather than a sword. It all hinged on what was happening in the next room. Would the king sign the treaty or not? All Breeze and Sazed could do was wait. He itched to get his portfolio out, to look over the next religion in the stack. He’d been considering the Canzi for over a day, and now that he’d made a decision about it, he wished to move on to the next sheet. During the last year, he’d gotten through about two-thirds of the religions. Barely a hundred remained, though the number was closer to two hundred if he took into account all of the sub-sects and denominations. He was close. Over the next few months, he’d be able to get through the rest of the religions. He wanted to give each one fair consideration. Surely, one of the remaining ones would strike him as containing the essence of truth he was searching for. Surely one of them would tell him what had happened to Tindwyl’s spirit without contradicting itself on a half-dozen different points. But, for the moment, he felt self-conscious reading in front of Breeze. So, Sazed forced himself to sit and wait patiently. The room around him was ornate, after the fashion of the old imperial nobility. Sazed wasn’t used to such finery, not anymore. Elend had sold or burned most of his lavish trappings—his people had needed food and warmth during the winter. King Lekal hadn’t done the same, it appeared, though perhaps that was because the winters were less harsh here in the South. Sazed glanced out the window beside his chair. Lekal City didn’t have a true palace—it had been just a country estate until about two years ago. The manor house, however, did have a nice view over the growing town—which was more of a large shantytown than it was a true city. Still, that shantytown controlled lands that were dangerously inside Elend’s defensive perimeter. They needed the security of King Lekal’s allegiance. And so, Elend had sent a contingent—including Sazed, who was his chief ambassador—to secure the loyalty of the Lekal king. That man deliberated in the next room with his aides, trying to decide whether or not to accept the treaty—which would make them subjects of Elend Venture. Chief ambassador of the New Empire… Sazed was not very fond of his title, for it implied that he was actually a citizen of the empire. His people, the Terris people, had sworn to call no man master again. They had spent a thousand years being oppressed, being bred like animals and turned into perfect, docile servants. Only with the fall of the Final Empire had the Terris become free to rule themselves. So far, the Terris people hadn’t done a very good job of that. Of course, it didn’t help that the Steel Inquisitors had slaughtered the entire Terris ruling council, leaving Sazed’s people without direction or leadership. In a way, we’re hypocrites anyway, he thought. The Lord Ruler was secretly a Terrisman. One of our own did those horrible things to us. What right do we have to insist on calling no foreigner master? It wasn’t a foreigner that destroyed our people, our culture, and our religion. And so, Sazed served as Elend Venture’s chief ambassador. Elend was a friend—a man Sazed respected like few others. To Sazed’s mind, even the Survivor himself hadn’t possessed Elend Venture’s strength of character. The emperor hadn’t tried to assume authority over the Terris people, even after he had accepted the refugees into his lands.
