58

Once you begin to understand these things, you can see how Ruin was trapped even though Preservation’s mind was gone, expended to create the prison. Though Preservation’s consciousness was mostly destroyed, his spirit and body were still in force. And, as an opposite force of Ruin, these could still prevent Ruin from destroying.
Or, at least, keep him from destroying things too quickly. Once his mind was “freed” from its prison the destruction accelerated quickly.

“THROW YOUR WEIGHT HERE,” Sazed said, pointing at a wooden lever. “The counterweights will fall, swinging down all four floodgates and stemming the flow into the cavern. I warn you, however—the explosion of water above will be rather spectacular. We should be able to fill the city’s canals in a matter of hours, and I suspect that a portion of the northern city will be flooded.”
“To dangerous levels?” Spook asked.
“I do not think so,” Sazed said. “The water will burst out through the conduits in the interchange building beside us. I’ve inspected the equipment there, and it appears sound. The water should flow directly into the canals, and from there exit the city. Either way, I would not want to be in those streetslots when this water comes. The current will be quite swift.”
“I’ve taken care of that,” Spook said. “Durn is going to make certain the people know to be clear of the waterways.”
Sazed nodded. Spook couldn’t help but be impressed. The complicated construct of wood, gears, and wire looked like it should have taken months to build, not weeks. Large nets of rocks weighed down the four gates, which hung, ready to block off the river.
“This is amazing, Saze,” Spook said. “With a sign as spectacular as the reappearance of the canal waters, the people will be certain to listen to us instead of the Citizen.” Breeze and Durn’s men had been working hard over the last few weeks, whispering to the people to watch for a miracle from the Survivor of the Flames. Something extraordinary, something to prove—once and for all—who was the rightful master of the city.
“It is the best I could do,” Sazed said with a modest bow of the head. “The seals won’t be perfectly tight, of course. However, that should matter little.”
“Men?” Spook said, turning to four of Goradel’s soldiers. “You understand what you are to do?”
“Yes, sir,” the lead soldier said. “We wait for a messenger, then throw the lever there.”
“If no messenger comes,” Spook said, “throw the switch at nightfall.”
“And,” Sazed said, raising a finger, “don’t forget to twist the sealing mechanism in the other room, plugging the water flow out of this chamber. Otherwise, the lake will eventually empty. Better that we keep this reservoir full, just in case.”
“Yes, sir,” the soldier said with a nod.
Spook turned, looking back over the cavern. Soldiers bustled about, preparing. He was going to need most of them for the night’s activities. They looked eager—they’d spent too long holed up in the cavern and the building above. To the side, Beldre regarded Sazed’s contraption with interest. Spook broke away from the soldiers, approaching her with a quick step.
“You’re really going to do it?” she said. “Return the water to the canals?”
Spook nodded.
“I sometimes imagined what it would be like to have the waters back,” she said. “The city wouldn’t feel as barren—it would become important, like it was during the early days of the Final Empire. All those beautiful waterways. No more ugly gashes in the ground.”
“It will be a wonderful sight,” Spook said, smiling.
Beldre just shook her head. “It… amazes me that you can be such different people at the same time. How can the man who would do such a beautiful thing for my city also plan such destruction?”
“Beldre, I’m not planning to destroy your city.”
“Just its government.”
“I do what needs to be done.”
“Men say that so easily,” Beldre said. “Yet, everybody seems to have a different opinion of what ‘needs’ to be done.”
“Your brother had his chance,” Spook said.
Beldre looked down. She still carried with her the letter they’d received earlier in the day—a response from Quellion. Beldre’s plea had been heartfelt, but the Citizen had responded with insults, implying that she had been forced to write the words because she was being held prisoner.
I do not fear a usurper, the letter read. I am protected by the Survivor himself. You will not have this city, tyrant.
Beldre looked up. “Don’t do it,” she whispered. “Give him more time. Please.”
Spook hesitated.
“There is no more time,” Kelsier whispered. “Do what must be done.”
“I’m sorry,” Spook said, turning from her. “Stay with the soldiers—I’m leaving four men to guard you. Not to keep you from fleeing, though they will do that. I want you inside this cavern. I can’t promise that the streets will be safe.”
He heard her sniffle quietly behind him. He left her standing there, then walked toward the gathering group of soldiers. One man brought Spook his dueling canes and singed cloak. Goradel stood at the front of his soldiers, looking proud. “We’re ready, my lord.”
Breeze walked up beside him, shaking his head, dueling cane tapping the ground. He sighed. “Well, here we go again…”
