“Well,” Ham said, standing beside Elend in the camp. “I didn’t expect that.”
Elend nodded slowly, watching the flood of men pour through the Fadrex gateway. Some stumbled in the deep ash; others pushed their way forward, their charge hampered to a slow crawl.
“Some stayed back,” Elend said, pointing up at the wall top. Not having tin, Ham wouldn’t be able to see the men who lined the wall, but he’d trust Elend’s words. Around them, Elend’s human soldiers were breaking camp. The koloss still waited silently in their positions, surrounding the camp.
“What is Yomen thinking?” Ham asked. “He’s throwing an inferior force against an army of koloss?”
Like we did, attacking the koloss camp back in Vetitan. Something about it made Elend very uncomfortable.
“Retreat,” Elend said.
“Huh?” Ham asked.
“I said sound the retreat!” Elend said. “Abandon position. Pull the soldiers back!”
At his silent command, the koloss began to charge away from the city. Yomen’s soldiers were still pushing their way through the ash. Elend’s koloss, however, would clear the way for his men. They should be able to stay ahead.
“Strangest retreat I’ve ever seen,” Ham noted, but moved back to give the orders.
That’s it, Elend thought in annoyance. It’s time to figure out what the hell is going on in that city.

Yomen was crying. They were small, quiet tears. He stood straight-backed, not facing the window.
He fears that he’s ordered his men to their deaths, Vin thought. She moved up to him, limping slightly from where she’d hit the ground. Marsh stood watching out the window. Ruin eyed her curiously.
“Yomen,” she said.
Yomen turned toward her. “It’s a test,” he said. “The Inquisitors are the Lord Ruler’s most holy priests. I’ll do as commanded, and the Lord Ruler will protect my men and this city. Then you will see.”
Vin gritted her teeth. Then, she turned and forced herself to walk up beside Marsh. She glanced out the window—and was surprised to see that Elend’s army was retreating away from Yomen’s soldiers. Yomen’s force wasn’t running with very much conviction. Obviously, they were content to let their superior enemy run away before them. The sun was finally setting.
Marsh did not seem to find Elend’s retreat amusing. That was enough to make Vin smile—which made Marsh grab her again.
“You think you have won?” Marsh asked, leaning down, his uneven spikeheads hanging just before Vin’s face.
Vin reached for his sash. Just a little farther…
“You claim to have been playing with me, child,” Ruin said, stepping up next to her. “But you are the one who has been played. The koloss who serve you, they get their strength from my power. You think that I would let you control them if it weren’t for my eventual gain?”
Vin felt a moment of chill.
Oh, no…

Elend felt a terrible ripping sensation. It was like a part of his innards had been suddenly, and forcibly, pulled away from him. He gasped, releasing his Steelpush. He fell through the ash-filled sky, and landed unevenly on a rock shelf outside of Fadrex City.
He gasped, breathing in and out, trembling.
What in the hell was that? he thought, standing up, holding his thumping head.
And then he realized it. He couldn’t feel the koloss anymore. In the distance, the massive blue creatures stopped running away. And then, to Elend’s horror, he watched them turn around.
They began to charge his men.
