40

Originally, we assumed that a koloss was a combination of two people into one. That was wrong. Koloss are not the melding of two people, but five, as evidenced by the four spikes needed to make them. Not five bodies, of course, but five souls.
Each pair of spikes grants what the kandra would call the Blessing of Potency. However, each spike also distorts the koloss body a little more, making it increasingly inhuman. Such is the cost of Hemalurgy.

“NOBODY KNOWS PRECISELY how Inquisitors are made,” Elend said from the front of the tent, addressing a small group, which included Ham, Cett, the scribe Noorden, and the mostly recovered Demoux. Vin sat at the back, still trying to sort through what she had discovered. Human… all koloss… they had once been people. “There are lots of theories about it, however,” Elend said. “Once the Lord Ruler fell, Sazed and I did some research, and discovered some interesting facts from the obligators we interviewed. For instance, Inquisitors are made from ordinary men—men who remember who they were, but gain new Allomantic abilities.” “Our experience with Marsh proves that as well,” Ham said. “He remembered who he was, even after he had all of those spikes driven through his body. And he gained the powers of a Mistborn when he became an Inquisitor.” “Excuse me,” Cett said, “but will someone please explain what the hell this has to do with our siege of the city? There aren’t any Inquisitors here.” Elend folded his arms. “This is important, Cett, because we’re at war with more than just Yomen. Something we don’t understand, something far greater than those soldiers inside of Fadrex.” Cett snorted. “You still believe in this talk of doom and gods and the like?” “Noorden,” Elend said, looking at the scribe. “Please tell Lord Cett what you told me earlier today.” The former obligator nodded. “Well, my lord, it’s like this. Those numbers relating to the percentage of people who fall ill to the mists, they’re just too regular to be natural. Nature works in organized chaos—randomness on the small scale, with trends on the large scale. I cannot believe that anything natural could have produced such precise results.” “What do you mean?” Cett asked. “Well, my lord,” Noorden said. “Imagine that you hear a tapping sound somewhere outside your tent. If it repeats occasionally, with no exact set pattern, then it might be the wind blowing a loose flap against a pole. However, if it repeats with exact regularity, you know that it must be a person, beating against a pole. You’d be able to make the distinction immediately, because you’ve learned that nature can be repetitive in a case like that, but not exact. These numbers are the same, my lord. They’re just too organized, too repetitive, to be natural. They had to have been crafted by somebody.” “You’re saying that a person made those soldiers sick?” Cett asked. “A person?… No, not a person, I’d guess,” Noorden said. “But something intelligent must have done it. That’s the only conclusion I can draw. Something with an agenda, something that cares to be precise.” The room fell silent. “And, this relates to Inquisitors somehow, my lord?” Demoux asked carefully. “It does,” Elend said. “At least, it does if you think as I do—which, I’ll admit, not many people do.” “For better or for worse…” Ham said, smiling. “Noorden, what do you know of how Inquisitors are made?” Elend asked. The scribe grew uncomfortable. “I was in the Canton of Orthodoxy, as you may know, not the Canton of Inquisition.” “Surely there were rumors,” Elend asked. “Well, of course,” Noorden said. “More than rumors, actually. The higher obligators were always trying to discover how the Inquisitors got their power. There was a rivalry between the Cantons, you see, and… well, I supposed you don’t care about that. Regardless, we did have rumors.” “And?” Elend asked. “They said…” Noorden began. “They said that an Inquisitor was a fusion of many different people. In order to make an Inquisitor, the Canton of Inquisition had to get a whole group of Allomancers, then combine their powers into one.” Again, silence in the room. Vin pulled her legs up, wrapping her arms around her knees. She didn’t like talking about Inquisitors. “Lord Ruler!” Ham swore quietly. “That’s it! That’s why the Inquisitors were so keen on hunting down skaa Mistings! Don’t you see! It wasn’t just because the Lord Ruler ordered half-breeds to be killed—it was so that the Inquisitors could perpetuate themselves! They needed Allomancers to kill so that they could make new Inquisitors!” Elend nodded from his place at the front of the room. “Somehow, those spikes in the Inquisitors’ bodies transfer Allomantic ability. You kill eight Mistings, and you give all their powers to one other man, such as Marsh. Sazed once told me that Marsh was always hesitant to speak of the day he was made an Inquisitor, but he did say that it was… ‘messy.’ ” Ham nodded. “And when Kelsier and Vin found his room the day he was taken and made an Inquisitor, they found a corpse in there. One they initially assumed was Marsh!” “Later, Marsh said that more than one person had been killed there,” Vin said quietly. “There just hadn’t been enough… left of them to tell.” “Again,” Cett said, “does this all have a point?” “Well, it seems to be doing a good job of annoying you,” Ham said lightly. “Do we need any other point?” Elend gave them both hard looks. “The point is, Cett, that Vin discovered something earlier this week.” The group turned toward her. “Koloss,” Vin said. “They’re made from humans.” “What?” Cett asked, frowning. “That’s absurd.” “No,” Vin said, shaking her head. “I’m sure of it. I’ve checked living koloss. Hidden in those folds and rips of skin on their bodies, they are pierced by spikes. Smaller than the Inquisitor spikes, and made from different metals, but all of the koloss have them.” “Nobody has been able to figure out where new koloss come from,” Elend said. “The Lord Ruler guarded the secret, and it’s become one of the great mysteries of our time. Koloss seem to kill each other with regularity when someone isn’t actively controlling them. Yet, there always seem to be more of the creatures. How?” “Because they are constantly replenishing their numbers,” Ham said, nodding slowly. “From the villages they pillage.” “Did you ever wonder,” Elend said, “back during the siege of Luthadel, why Jastes’s koloss army attacked a random village before coming for us? The creatures needed to replenish their numbers.” “They always walk about,” Vin said, “wearing clothing, talking about being human. Yet, they can’t quite remember what it was like. Their minds have been broken.” Elend nodded. “The other day, Vin finally got one of them to show her how to make new koloss. From what he did, and from what he’s said since, we believe that he was going to try to combine two men into one. That would make a creature with the strength of two men, but the mind of neither.” “A third art,” Ham said, looking up. “A third way to use the metals. There is Allomancy, which draws power from the metals themselves. There is Feruchemy, which uses metals to draw power from your own body, and there is…” “Marsh called it Hemalurgy,” Vin said quietly. “Hemalurgy…” Ham said. “Which uses the metals to draw power from someone else’s body.” “Great,” Cett said. “Point?” “The Lord Ruler created servants to help him,” Elend said. “Using this art… this Hemalurgy… he made soldiers, which we call koloss. He made spies, which we call kandra. And he made priests, which we call Inquisitors. He built them all with weaknesses, so that he could control them.” “I first learned how to take control of the koloss because of TenSoon,” Vin said. “He inadvertently showed me the secret. He mentioned that the kandra and koloss were cousins, and I realized I could control one just as I had the other.” “I… still don’t see where you’re heading with this,” Demoux said, glancing from Vin to Elend. “The Inquisitors must have the same weakness, Demoux,” Elend said. “This Hemalurgy leaves the mind… wounded.
