“The cache remains our primary target,” Elend said. To the side, he could see Vin smiling.
“Fine,” Cett said, sighing. “Then you know what we have to do. This siege could take a while.”
Elend nodded. “Ham, send our engineers in under cover of mist. See if they can find a way for our troops to cross those troughs. Have the scouts search out streams that might run into the city—Cett, presumably you can help us locate some of these. And, once we get spies into the city, have them search out food stores that we can ruin.”
“A good start,” Cett said. “Of course, there’s one easy way to sow chaos in that city, to perhaps make them surrender without a fight…”
“We’re not going to assassinate King Yomen,” Elend said.
“Why not?” Cett demanded. “We’ve got two Mistborn. We’ll have no difficulty killing off the Fadrex leadership.”
“We don’t work that way,” Ham said, face growing dark.
“Oh?” Cett asked. “That didn’t stop Vin from tearing a hole through my army and attacking me back before we teamed up.”
“That was different,” Ham said.
“No,” Elend said, interrupting. “It wasn’t. The reason we’re not going to assassinate Yomen, Cett, is because I want to try diplomacy first.”
“Diplomacy?” Cett asked. “Didn’t we just march an army of forty thousand soldiers on his city? That’s not a diplomatic move.”
“True,” Elend said, nodding. “But we haven’t attacked, not yet. Now that I’m here in person, I might as well try talking before sending out knives in the night. We might be able to persuade Lord Yomen that an alliance will benefit him more than a war.”
“If we make an alliance,” Cett said, leaning forward in his chair, “I don’t get my city back.”
“I know,” Elend said.
Cett frowned.
“You seem to be forgetting yourself, Cett,” Elend said. “You did not ‘team up’ with me. You knelt before me, offering up oaths of service in exchange for not getting executed. Now, I appreciate your allegiance, and I will see you rewarded with a kingdom to rule under me. However, you don’t get to choose where that kingdom is, nor when I will grant it.”
Cett paused, sitting in his chair, one arm resting on his useless, paralyzed legs. Finally, he smiled. “Damn, boy. You’ve changed a lot in the year I’ve known you.”
“So everyone is fond of telling me,” Elend said. “Vin. You think you can get into the city?”
She raised an eyebrow. “I hope that was meant to be rhetorical.”
“It was meant to be polite,” Elend said. “I need you to do some scouting. We know next to nothing about what’s been going on in this dominance lately—we’ve focused all of our efforts on Urteau and the South.”
Vin shrugged. “I can go poke around a bit. I don’t know what you expect me to find.”
“Cett,” Elend said, turning, “I need names. Informants, or perhaps some noblemen that might still be loyal to you.”
“Noblemen?” Cett asked, amused. “Loyal?”
Elend rolled his eyes. “How about some that could be bribed to pass on a little information.”
“Sure,” Cett said. “I’ll write up some names and locations. Assuming they still live in the city. Hell, assuming they’re even still alive. Can’t count on much these days.”
Elend nodded. “We won’t take any further action until we have more information. Ham, make certain the soldiers dig in well—use the field fortifications that Demoux taught them. Cett, see that those guard patrols get set up, and make certain our Tineyes remain alert and on watch. Vin will scout and see if she can sneak into the cache like she did in Urteau. If we know what’s in there, then we can better judge whether to gamble on trying to conquer the city or not.”
The various members of the group nodded, understanding that the meeting was over. As they left, Elend stepped back out into the mists, looking up at the distant bonfires burning on the rocky heights.
Quiet as a sigh, Vin stepped up to his side, following his gaze. She stood for a few moments. Then she glanced to the side, where a pair of soldiers were entering the tent to carry Cett away. Her eyes narrowed in displeasure.
“I know,” Elend said quietly, knowing that she was thinking of Cett again and his influence over Elend.
“You didn’t deny that you might turn to assassination,” Vin said softly.
“Hopefully it won’t come to that.”
“And if it does?”
“Then I’ll make the decision that is best for the empire.”
Vin was silent for a moment. Then, she glanced at the fires up above.
“I could come with you,” Elend offered.
She smiled, then kissed him. “Sorry,” she said. “But you’re noisy.”
“Come now. I’m not that bad.”
“Yes you are,” Vin said. “Plus, you smell.”
“Oh?” he asked, amused. “What do I smell like?”
“An emperor. A Tineye would pick you out in seconds.”
Elend raised his eyebrows. “I see. And, don’t you possess an imperial scent as well?”
“Of course I do,” Vin said, wrinkling her nose. “But I know how to get rid of it. Either way, you’re not good enough to go with me, Elend. I’m sorry.”
Elend smiled. Dear, blunt Vin.
Behind him, the soldiers left the tent, carrying Cett. An aide walked up, delivering to Elend a short list of informants and noblemen who might be willing to talk. Elend passed it to Vin. “Have fun,” he said.
She dropped a coin between them, kissed him again, then shot up into the night.
