“What?” Spook shrugged. “Hard to confirm now, but that’s what the stories say. The nobility seemed immune to the mistsickness. Not skaa who had noble blood, but actually nobility.” “How odd,” Breeze noted. More than odd, Sazed thought. Downright strange. Does Elend know about this connection? As Sazed considered it, it seemed unlikely that Elend did. Their army and allies were all made up of skaa. The only nobility they knew were those back in Luthadel, and they had all chosen to stay inside at night, rather than risk going into the mists. “Either way,” Spook said, “Quellion’s a bully. And bullies don’t like anyone in their turf who can challenge them. We should have had some kind of attempt on our lives by now.” “The lad has a point,” Breeze said. “Quellion’s type doesn’t kill just in fancy executions. I’d bet that for every person he throws into one of those buildings, there are three dead in an alley somewhere, slowly being buried in ash.” “I’ve told Goradel and his men to be particularly careful,” Spook said, “and I’ve prowled our perimeter. However, I haven’t caught any assassins so much as spying on us. Quellion’s troops just sit out there, watching us, but not doing anything.” Breeze rubbed his chin. “Perhaps Quellion is more afraid of us than you assume.” “Perhaps,” Spook said, sighing. He rubbed his forehead. “Lord Spook,” Sazed said carefully, “you should sleep.” “I’m fine,” Spook said. If I didn’t know better, I’d say he was burning pewter to stay awake, Sazed thought. Or, am I just looking for signs to confirm what I worried about before? We never questioned when Vin or Kelsier manifested powers beyond what even normal Allomancers were capable of. Why should I be so suspicious of Spook? Is it simply because I know him too well? Do I focus on my memories of the boy when he has obviously become a man? “Anyway,” Spook said, “how goes the research?” “Rather well, actually,” Sazed said, turning around several of his diagrams so that Spook could see them. “I am about ready to begin work on the actual construction.” “How long will it take, do you think?” “A few weeks, perhaps,” Sazed said. “A rather short time, all things considered. Fortunately, the people who drained the canals left behind a large amount of rubble, which I can use. In addition, the Lord Ruler stocked this storehouse quite well. There is timber, as well as some basic carpentry supplies, and even some pulley networks.” “What was that creature preparing for?” Breeze said. “Food and water, I can understand. But, blankets? Timber? Pulleys?” “Disaster, Lord Breeze,” Sazed said. “He included everything that a people would need in the event that the city itself was destroyed. He even included bedrolls for sleeping and infirmary supplies. Perhaps he feared koloss rampages.” “No,” Spook said. “He prepared for exactly what is happening. Now, you’ll be building something to plug the water? I kind of thought you’d just collapse the tunnels.” “Oh, goodness no,” Sazed said. “We don’t have the manpower or equipment to cause a cave-in. Also, I wouldn’t want to do anything that would risk bringing the cavern down upon us. My plans are to build a wooden blocking mechanism that can be lowered into the current. Enough weight, along with the proper framework, should provide reinforcement to stop the flow. It’s actually not unlike the mechanisms used in the locks of canals.” “Which,” Breeze added, “he’ll be happy to tell you about. At length.” Sazed smiled. “I do think that—” He was cut off, however, as Captain Goradel arrived, looking a fair bit more solemn than usual. “Lord Spook,” Goradel said. “Someone is waiting for you above.” “Who?” Spook asked. “Durn?” “No, my lord. She says she’s the Citizen’s sister.”
