There isn’t a large underground left in this city, but Quellion will be surprised at the damage it can do if manipulated the right way.” Spook stood quietly for a moment. “There’s a man milking for information in the tavern on Westbrook Lane. Send someone to contact him. He’s a Soother—the best one you’ll ever meet—but he stands out a bit. Make your offer to him.” Durn nodded. Spook turned to go, then glanced back at Durn. “Don’t mention my name to him, or what happened to me.” With that, he left through the hallway, passing the guards and the displaced crooks from the card game. Spook pulled off his blindfold as he stepped into the daylight-like brightness of the starlit night. He strolled through the Harrows, trying to decide what he thought of the meeting. Durn hadn’t revealed anything all that important. Yet, Spook felt as if something were happening around him, something he hadn’t planned on, something he couldn’t quite decipher. He was becoming more comfortable with Kelsier’s voice, and with his pewter, but he was still worried that he wouldn’t be able to live up to the position he’d fallen into. “If you don’t get to Quellion soon,” Kelsier said, “he’s going to find your friends. He’s already preparing assassins.” “He won’t send them,” Spook said quietly. “Especially if he’s heard Durn’s rumors about me. Everyone knows that Sazed and Breeze were on your crew. Quellion won’t take them out unless they prove to be such a threat that he has no other choice.” “Quellion is an unstable man,” Kelsier said. “Don’t wait too long. You don’t want to find out how irrational he can be.” Spook fell silent. Then, he heard footsteps, approaching quickly. He felt the vibrations in the ground. He spun and loosened his cloak, reaching for his weapon. “You’re not in danger,” Kelsier said quietly. Spook relaxed as someone rushed around the alley corner. It was one of the men from Durn’s chips game. The man was puffing, his face flush with exhaustion. “My lord!” he said. “I’m no lord,” Spook said. “What happened? Is Durn in danger?” “No, sir,” the man said. “I just… I…” Spook raised an eyebrow. “I need your help,” the man said between breaths. “When we realized who you were, you were already gone. I just…” “Help with what?” Spook said tersely. “My sister, sir,” the man said. “She got taken by the Citizen. Our… father was a nobleman. Durn hid me, but Mailey, she got sold by the woman I’d left her with. Sir, she’s only seven. He’s going to burn her in a few days!” Spook frowned. What does he expect me to do? He opened his mouth to ask that very question, but then stopped. He wasn’t the same man anymore. He wasn’t limited as the old Spook would have been. He could do something else. What Kelsier would have done. “Can you gather ten men?” Spook asked. “Friends of yours, willing to take part in some late-night work?” “Sure. I guess. Does this have to do with saving Mailey?” “No,” Spook said. “It has to do with your payment for saving Mailey. Get me those workers, and I’ll do what I can to help your sister.” The man nodded eagerly. “Do it now,” Spook said, pointing. “We start tonight.”
