Sazed reached down, touching his stomach. Breeze’s comments pained him. They brought his mind back to that terrible time a year before, when Tindwyl had been killed. When Sazed had fought Marsh at the Well of Ascension, and had nearly been killed himself. Even through his clothing, he could feel the scars on his abdomen, where Marsh had hit him with a collection of metal rings, piercing Sazed’s skin and nearly killing him. He’d drawn upon the Feruchemical power of those very rings to save his life, healing his body, engulfing them within him. Soon after, however, he’d stored up some health and then had a surgeon remove the rings from his body. Despite Vin’s protests that having them inside him would be an advantage, Sazed was worried that it was unhealthy to keep them embedded in his own flesh. Besides, he had just wanted them gone. Breeze turned to look out the window. “You were always the best of us, Sazed,” he said quietly. “Because you believed in something.” “I am sorry, Lord Breeze,” Sazed said. “I do not mean to disappoint you.” “Oh, you don’t disappoint me,” Breeze said. “Because I don’t believe what you’ve said. You’re not meant to be an atheist, Sazed. I have a feeling you’ll be no good at it—doesn’t suit you at all. You’ll come around eventually.” Sazed looked back out the window. He was brash for a Terrisman, but he did not wish to argue further. “I never did thank you,” Breeze said. “For what, Lord Breeze?” “For pulling me out of myself,” Breeze said. “For forcing me to get up, a year ago, and keep going. If you hadn’t helped me, I don’t know that I would ever have gotten over… what happened.” Sazed nodded. On the inside, however, his thoughts were more bitter. Yes, you saw destruction and death, my friend. But the woman you love is still alive. I could have come back too, if I hadn’t lost her. I could have recovered, as you did. The door opened. Sazed and Breeze both turned. A solitary aide entered, bearing an ornate sheet of parchment. King Lekal had signed the treaty at the bottom. His signature was small, almost cramped, in the large space allotted. He knew he was beaten. The aide set the treaty on the table, then retreated.
