The soldiers were gone.
Sazed looked through the window with the others, inspecting the empty plot of ground where Quellion’s troops had been camped for the last few weeks, watching the Ministry building.
“When did they leave?” Breeze asked, rubbing his chin thoughtfully.
“Just now,” Goradel explained.
The move felt ominous to Sazed for some reason. He stood beside Spook, Breeze, and Goradel—though the others seemed to take the soldiers’ retreat as a good sign.
“Well, it will make sneaking out easier,” Goradel noted.
“More than that,” Spook said. “It means I can incorporate our own soldiers in the plan against Quellion. We’d never have gotten them out of the building secretly with half an army on our doorstep, but now…”
“Yes,” Goradel said. “But where did they go? Do you think Quellion is suspicious of us?”
Breeze snorted. “That, my dear man, sounds like a question for your scouts. Why not have them search out where that army went?”
Goradel nodded. But then, to Sazed’s slight surprise, the soldier looked toward Spook for a confirmation. Spook nodded, and the captain moved off to give the orders.
He looks to the boy over Breeze and I, Sazed thought. He shouldn’t have been surprised. Sazed himself had agreed to let Spook take the lead, and to Goradel, all three of them—Sazed, Breeze, Spook—were probably equal. All were in Elend’s inner circle, and of the three, Spook was the best warrior. It made sense for Goradel to look to him as a source of authority.
It just felt strange to see Spook giving orders to the soldiers. Spook had always been so quiet during the days of the original crew. And yet, Sazed was beginning to respect the boy too. Spook knew how to give orders in a way that Sazed could not, and he had shown remarkable foresight in his preparations in Urteau, as well as his plans to overthrow Quellion. He had a flair for the dramatic that Breeze kept saying was remarkable.
And yet, there was that bandage on the boy’s eyes, and the other things he hadn’t explained. Sazed knew that he should have pushed harder for answers, but the truth was that he trusted Spook. Sazed had known Spook from the lad’s young teenage years, when he’d barely been capable of communicating with others.
As Goradel moved off, Spook looked to Sazed and Breeze. “Well?”
“Quellion is planning something,” Breeze said. “Seems too early to jump to conclusions, though.”
“I agree,” Spook said. “For now, we go forward with the plan.”
With that, they split up. Sazed turned, making his way back down and over to the far side of the cavern—to where a large group of soldiers worked in an area well lit with lanterns. On his arms, he wore the familiar weight of his copperminds—two on his forearms, two on his upper arms. In them sat the knowledge of engineering he needed to complete the task Spook had assigned him.
Lately, Sazed didn’t know what to think. Each time he climbed the ladder and looked out over the city, he saw worse signs. The ashfalls were heavier. The earthquakes were growing more and more frequent, and more and more violent. The mists were lingering later and later in the day. The sky grew dark, the red sun more like a vast bleeding scar than a source of light and life. The ashmounts made the horizon red even during the night.
It seemed to him that the end of the world should be a time when men found faith, not a time when they lost it. Yet, the little time that he’d devoted to studying the religions in his portfolio had not been encouraging. Twenty more religions eliminated, leaving just thirty potential candidates.
He shook his head to himself, moving among the toiling soldiers. Several groups worked on wooden contraptions filled with rocks—weight systems that would fall to block off the water running into the cavern. Others worked on the system of pulleys that would lower the mechanism. After about a half hour or so, Sazed determined that they were all doing their tasks well, and returned to his calculations. However, as he walked to his table, he saw Spook approaching him.
“Riots,” Spook said, falling into step beside Sazed.
“Excuse me, Lord Spook?”
“That’s where the soldiers went. Some people started a fire, and the soldiers guarding us were needed to put it out before the whole city went up. There’s a lot more wood here than there is in Central Dominance cities.”
Sazed frowned. “Our actions here are becoming dangerous, I fear.”
Spook shrugged. “Seems like a good thing to me. This city is on the edge of snapping, Saze. Just like Luthadel was when we took control.”
“Only the presence of Elend Venture kept that city from destroying itself,” Sazed said quietly. “Kelsier’s revolution could easily have turned into a disaster.”
“It will be all right,” Spook said.
Sazed eyed the young man as the two of them walked through the cavern. Spook seemed to be trying very hard to project an air of confidence. Perhaps Sazed was just growing cynical, but he found it difficult to be as optimistic as Spook.
“You don’t believe me,” Spook said.
“I’m sorry, Lord Spook,” Sazed said. “It’s not that… it’s just that I seem to have trouble having faith in anything lately.”
“Oh.”
They walked silently for a while, eventually finding themselves at the edge of the glassy underground lake. Sazed paused beside the waters, his worries chewing at his insides. He stood for a long moment, feeling frustrated, but not really having an outlet.
“Don’t you even worry, Spook?” Sazed finally asked. “Worry that we’ll fail?”
“I don’t know,” Spook said, shuffling.
“And, it’s so much more than this,” Sazed said, waving back at the work crews. “The very sky seems to be our enemy. The land is dying. Don’t you wonder what good any of this is? Why we even struggle? We’re all doomed anyway!”
Spook flushed. Then, finally, he looked down. “I don’t know,” he repeated. “I… I understand what you’re doing, Sazed. You’re trying to find out if I doubt myself. I guess you can see through me.”
Sazed frowned, but Spook wasn’t looking.
“You’re right,” the young man said then, wiping his brow, “I do wonder if I’ll fail. I guess Tindwyl would be annoyed at me, wouldn’t she? She didn’t think that leaders should doubt themselves.”
That gave Sazed pause. What am I doing? he thought, horrified at his outburst. Is this what I’ve really become? During most of my life, I resisted the Synod, rebelling against my own people. Yet, I was at peace, confident that I was doing the right thing.
Now I come here, where people need me most, and I just sit around and snap at my friends, telling them that we’re just going to die?
“But,” Spook said, looking up, “though I doubt myself, I still think we’ll be all right.”
Sazed was surprised at the hope he saw in the boy’s eyes. That’s what I’ve lost.
“How can you say that?” Sazed asked.
“I don’t know, really,” Spook said. “I just… Well, do you remember that question you asked me when you first got here? We were standing by the lake, just over there. You asked me about faith. You asked what good it was, if it just led people to hurt each other, like Quellion’s faith in the Survivor has done.”
Sazed looked out over the lake. “Yes,” he said softly. “I remember.”
“I’ve been thinking about that ever since,” Spook said. “And… I think I might have an answer.”
“Please.”
“Faith,” Spook said, “means that it doesn’t matter what happens. You can trust that somebody is watching. Trust that somebody will make it all right.”
Sazed frowned.
“It means that there will always be a way,” Spook whispered, staring forward, eyes glazed, as if seeing things that Sazed could not.
Yes, Sazed thought. That is what I have lost. And it’s what I need to get back.
