Welcome back to Storytelling Series - Beginner Story Guide (A2).
Last time, Vin and Elend made a very loud entrance at a grand ball.
They dropped from the sky right onto the castle steps! Now, they are inside.
The entire room is silent, and everyone is watching them.
And then, something strange happens.
The lords and ladies… they start to bow.
They act as if Vin and Elend’s arrival was completely normal.
Can you imagine? Everyone is pretending this is just another Tuesday.
Vin lets Elend take the lead.
He is more experienced with these things.
He knows how to act at a royal party.
He nods to people as they walk.
He shows just the right amount of self-assurance.
Mmm… self-assurance.
That’s a lovely word.
It means he feels sure of himself.
He isn't scared or nervous.
He looks like he belongs there.
Behind them, guards finally arrive at the doors.
But they stop.
They seem worried about disturbing the party.
So they just… wait.
Vin looks around the room.
And then she sees him.
Through a beautiful colored-glass wall, she sees a man at a high table.
“There,” she says to Elend.
Elend says, “I see him.” He leads her around the glass.
And Vin sees Aradan Yomen, the king, for the first time.
He is younger than she expected.
Maybe as young as Elend.
He has a round face and serious eyes.
His head is shaved bald, like an obligator.
He wears dark gray robes.
And around his eyes… there are complicated tattoos.
These tattoos show he is a very important person.
King Yomen stands up when they approach.
He looks completely shocked.
Utterly dumbfounded.
His mouth is probably open a little bit.
He cannot believe they are here.
The guards have started to slowly enter the room now.
Elend stops a short distance from the king’s table.
He looks right into Yomen’s eyes.
The room is so, so quiet.
I think everyone is holding their breath.
Then, Yomen does something very surprising.
He raises his hand… and he waves the guards away.
He tells them to go back.
Just like that.
And almost immediately, people start talking again.
The sound of chatter fills the room.
Yomen sits back down.
He looks troubled.
He doesn't eat his food.
Vin looks at Elend.
“Well,” she whispers, “we’re in.
What now?” Elend has a plan.
He needs to talk to Yomen, but not yet.
First, they need to show everyone that they are not afraid.
He says, “We should mingle.” To mingle means to move around and talk to different people at a party.
It’s a good way to meet everyone.
Elend suggests they split up.
That way, they can talk to more people.
Vin hesitates for a moment.
But Elend smiles and promises he can protect himself.
So she agrees.
Their goal is to make the people of the city feel unsafe.
To show them that their king, Yomen, cannot keep the Emperor and Empress out.
After they make a stir, after they get everyone talking, then Elend will speak to the king.
And everyone will listen.
Elend also tells Vin to look for people who might support them.
People who are not happy with King Yomen.
He kisses her cheek, and then he walks away.
And Vin is alone.
She stands there in her beautiful gown, and she feels a moment of shock.
For two years, she has worked very hard to stay out of situations like this.
She wore trousers and shirts, not fancy dresses.
She did not like these parties.
She asks herself, Why? Why did she suggest this plan? Why put herself back in this position? She doesn't need to prove anything to these people.
Or… does she? Mmm… she feels awkward.
It has been a long, long time since she was alone at a party like this.
She remembers her very first ball.
That night, she was pretending to be someone else.
She was playing a part.
She can’t do that anymore.
Everyone knows who she is.
But she can’t just stand there, either.
The entire room seems to be staring at her.
So, she starts to walk.
She walks through the beautiful white room.
Her black dress stands out against all the colorful dresses of the other women.
She knows there is one thing she can always count on at these parties.
Whenever noblewomen gather, one of them is always the leader.
The most important one.
And Vin finds her with ease.
This woman has dark hair and sits at a table, surrounded by her followers.
People who always agree with her.
Vin recognizes that proud look.
That way her voice is loud enough to sound important, but soft enough to make people listen closely.
Vin knows what she has to do.
Years ago, she had to be careful and slow.
Now? She doesn’t have time for that.
She walks with determination.
She decides that whichever side this woman is on… Vin will be on the opposite one.
The woman’s followers see Vin coming.
They look scared.
Their leader tries to stay calm.
She tries to ignore Vin.
Vin thinks, I can’t let her ignore me.
So Vin sits down at the table.
Right across from the woman.
She did not ask.
(soft laugh) She just sat.
Then, Vin turns to the other women, the followers.
And she says, “She’s planning to betray you.” The women look at each other, confused.
Vin continues.
“She has plans to get out of the city.
When the army attacks, she won’t be here.
She’s going to leave you all to die.” Wow.
That is… very direct.
The lead woman is furious.
“Excuse me?” she says.
“Did I invite you to sit here?” Vin just smiles.
For a woman like this, her power comes from the people who listen to her.
To make her react, you just have to threaten to take her followers.
Vin turns to the woman.
“No, you didn’t invite me.
I invited myself.
Someone needs to warn the women here.” The woman says Vin is spreading lies.
But Vin explains her logic.
A woman like this would never let a man like Yomen decide her future.
She would always have an escape plan.
The lady says, “Your threats do not frighten me.” Vin takes a slow sip of her wine.
And then she says, “I haven’t threatened you yet.” So, Vin is now face-to-face with the most powerful woman at the party.
She has made a very bold move.
What will happen next? Vin has more than just sharp words.
She has her secret powers, her Allomancy.
Next time, we will see how she uses her power in this conversation.
And the result… well, the result is something Vin does not expect at all.
Thank you for listening.
Join us next time for another chapter.
