Welcome to Storytelling Series - Beginner Story Guide A2! I am so glad you are here with me today.
Last time, we were with Vin at a very tense party.
She used her power to scare a noblewoman, but something unexpected happened.
The other women left their leader… and they came to Vin.
They wanted to be her friends.
Now, Vin is inside the world of high society.
But today, we leave that party.
We go somewhere very different.
We go underground, with Sazed and his friends, to a place of secrets.
Picture this.
Deep under the city of Urteau.
It is not a small, dark cave.
No.
It is a huge cavern.
So big, it feels like another world.
In this cavern, there are shelves.
Tall shelves, filled with food and supplies.
Enough to live for a very, very long time.
And in the middle of it all… there is a lake.
A beautiful, clear lake.
The water is pure.
It has no ash from the sky.
Sazed is explaining how it got there.
He says, “The Lord Ruler did this.” He made this place on purpose.
He moved an entire river to flow down here, into this secret reservoir.
A reservoir is a place to store a large amount of water.
It took many, many years to build.
But Breeze asks a very good question.
“Why?” Why do all this work? Sazed believes the reason is simple.
It was a plan for the future.
A plan for survival.
If a disaster happened in the city above, the water in the canals would become dirty.
But down here… the water would stay clean and safe.
The Lord Ruler wanted to be sure that people could survive.
It is a strange thought, isn't it? The terrible Lord Ruler… was also a planner.
A protector, in his own way.
He was thinking about the future.
It shows he was a complex person.
He was not just one thing.
He was… a duality.
Duality is a key idea here.
It means having two very different parts.
Like black and white, or good and evil, together in one person.
The Lord Ruler wanted people to see him that way.
But Sazed knows… it was mostly a lie.
So, Sazed and his friends.Breeze, Spook, and Allrianne.are living in this cavern.
They have made little “rooms” with furniture and sheets.
It is safer here than in the Ministry building above.
If someone attacks, they will be safe down here, with all the food and clean water they need.
But safety is not their only problem.
Allrianne speaks for everyone when she asks, “So we have water.
What about that maniac running the city?” She is talking about the Citizen, the city’s new leader.
He is a man named Quellion.
And Sazed, who is now in charge of their group, knows they must talk about him.
They have a mission from Elend Venture.
They need to secure the city.
But the Citizen does not want to work with them.
So, what should they do? Spook speaks first.
He is young and direct.
He says, “That man needs to go.
We need assassins.” Just like they killed the Lord Ruler.
Simple, right? Mmm… but Breeze, who is always so clever, disagrees.
He explains that killing the Lord Ruler worked because he was a god.
When he died, it created a huge shock.
But this Citizen? He’s just a man.
Breeze says that if they kill him, someone just like him will take his place.
And everyone will call them murderers.
It wouldn’t solve the real problem.
So, what is Breeze’s idea? He says they need to be smarter.
He says, “we need to undermine him.” That’s our special phrase for today.
To undermine someone.
It means to make them weaker, but slowly and secretly.
It’s like taking away the ground from under their feet, so they fall.
Breeze wants to show the people of Urteau that the Citizen’s government is silly.
That his ideas are bad.
If they can do that, they won’t just stop the Citizen.
They will stop his whole system.
It’s a much more clever plan than just fighting.
But… it will also be much more difficult.
They don’t have an army to help them.
But Sazed… Sazed is quiet.
He is thinking.
And what he says next surprises everyone.
He says he is not sure they should stop the Citizen at all.
The cavern becomes very silent.
Breeze looks at him, curious.
Sazed explains his feelings.
He says the Citizen is teaching the same things their hero, Kelsier, used to teach.
Kelsier spoke about revolution.
He spoke about killing the nobility and letting the skaa rule themselves.
The people of Urteau are just… doing what Kelsier said.
Sazed asks a difficult question: “what right have we to take it from them?” He even says that maybe these people are more true to Kelsier’s ideas than they are.
After all, they put a nobleman, Elend, on the throne.
You can feel the tension in their little room.
Spook and Breeze don’t know what to say.
Spook finally says that it’s just not right.
He knew Kelsier.
Kelsier didn’t want people to be grim and bullied.
He wanted them to be happy and free.
Breeze agrees.
He reminds them all that they have orders from Elend.
Their new empire needs the supplies in this cavern.
They must protect the city for the greater good.
That phrase… for the greater good… it makes Sazed think.
He knows Spook is right.
Kelsier would not want this sad, angry society to continue in his name.
Something must be done.
So, he agrees.
He asks Breeze, “What should our course of action be?” Breeze’s plan is to wait.
For now, they will do nothing.
He needs time.
Time to understand the city.
Are the people close to rebelling against their leader? Are the criminals active? Are the government men corrupt? Once he has answers, then they can make a real plan.
Spook still wants to act like Kelsier, to just topple the government.
But Breeze reminds him of a simple, sad truth.
“We don’t have Kelsier anymore.” And Sazed knows this is true.
Kelsier’s passion was powerful.
It helped him do impossible things.
But that same passion, that hatred for the nobility… Sazed worries it will destroy the very people it was meant to save.
The meeting ends.
Sazed tells Breeze to take the time he needs.
As they stand up, Breeze catches Sazed’s eye.
He gives him a little wink, and a smile.
It’s a smile that says, ‘Don’t worry so much.
This won’t be as hard as you think.’ Sazed feels Breeze use his Allomancy, his power, to send a little wave of encouragement.
And for a moment, Sazed smiles back.
For a moment, he feels a little better.
They have a plan.
A slow, careful, clever plan.
And maybe, just maybe, it will work.
But as we leave Sazed in that cavern, we know his peace is temporary.
A deep darkness is growing inside him, a feeling that nothing matters.
Soon, he will question everything he has ever believed.
And in his search for truth, he will find something incredible.
A message, written in steel, left behind by the Lord Ruler himself.
It is a message of fear, a warning about a secret enemy… and a clue to a hidden power that could change the course of their future.
Join me next time, as Sazed uncovers a secret that has been waiting for a thousand years.
