He could see Lord Harms and Steris’s cousin Marasi sitting at the table already. “I’m remembering why I left the City,” Waxillium said honestly. “Life is so damn hard here.” “Many would say that of the Roughs.” “And few of them have lived in both,” Waxillium said. “Living here is a different kind of hard, but it’s still hard. Marasi is joining us again?” “Indeed.” “What is going on with her, Steris?” “She’s from the Outer Estates and badly wanted the chance to attend university here in the City. My father took pity on her, as her own parents haven’t the means to support her. He is allowing her to reside with us for the duration of her studies.” A valid explanation, though it seemed to roll out of Steris’s mouth far too quickly. Was it a practiced excuse, or was Waxillium assuming too much? Either way, further discussion was interrupted as Lord Harms rose to greet his daughter. Waxillium shook hands with Lord Harms, took Marasi’s hand and bowed, then sat. Steris began speaking with her father about the people she’d noted to be attending or absent, and Waxillium rested elbows on the table, listening with half an ear. Hard room to defend, he thought absently. Snipers on those balconies would work, but you’d need some on each one, watching to make sure nobody gets beneath the other. Anyone with a strong enough gun—or the right Allomantic powers—could take out snipers from below. The pillars below the balconies would also be good shelter, though. The more cover there was, the better the situation for the one who was outnumbered. Not that you ever wanted to be outnumbered, but he’d rarely been in any fight where he wasn’t. So he looked for cover. In the open, a gunfight came down to who could field the most men with weapons. But once you could hide, skill and experience started to compensate. Maybe this room wouldn’t be too bad a place to fight after all. He— He hesitated. What was he doing? He’d made his decision. Did he have to keep remaking it every few days? “Marasi,” he said, forcing himself into conversation. “Your cousin tells me you’ve entered into university studies?” “I’m in my final year,” she said. He waited for a further reply, and didn’t get one. “And how go your studies?” “Well,” she said, and looked down, holding her napkin. That was productive, he thought with a sigh. Fortunately, it looked like a server was approaching. The lean man began pouring wine for them. “The soup will be along presently,” he explained with a faint Terris accent, lofty vowels, and a slightly nasal tone. The voice froze Waxillium stiff. “Today’s soup,” the server continued, “is a delightfully seasoned prawn bisque with a hint of pepper. You shall find it quite enjoyable, I think.” He glanced at Waxillium, eyes twinkling in amusement. Though he wore a false nose and a wig, those were Wayne’s eyes. Waxillium groaned softly. “My lord doesn’t like prawns?” Wayne asked with horror. “The bisque is quite good,” Lord Harms said. “I’ve had it at a Yomen party before.” “It’s not the soup,” Waxillium said. “I’ve just recalled something I forgot to do.” It involves strangling someone. “I shall return shortly with your soup, my lords and ladies,” Wayne promised. He even had a fake line of Terris earrings in his ears. Of course, Wayne was part Terris, as was Waxillium himself—as evidenced by their Feruchemical abilities. That was rare in the population; though nearly a fifth of the Originators had been Terris, they weren’t prone to marrying other ethnicities. “Does that server look familiar?” Marasi asked, turning and watching him go. “He must have served us last time we were here,” Lord Harms said. “But I wasn’t with you last—” “Lord Harms,” Waxillium jumped in, “has anything been heard of your relative? The one who was kidnapped by the Vanishers?” “No,” he said, taking a sip of his wine. “Ruin those thieves. This kind of thing is absolutely unacceptable. They should confine such behavior to the Roughs!” “Yes,” Steris said, “it does somewhat undermine one’s respect for the constabulary when things like this occur. And the robbery inside the city! How terrible.” “What was it like?” Marasi suddenly asked. “Lord Ladrian? Living where there was no law?” She seemed genuinely curious, though her comment earned a glare from Lord Harms, likely for bringing up Waxillium’s past. “It was difficult sometimes,” Waxillium admitted. “Out there, some people just believe they can take what they want. It would actually surprise them when someone stood up to them. As if I were some spoiler, the only one who didn’t understand the game they were all playing.” “Game?” Lord Harms said, frowning. “A figure of speech, Lord Harms,” Waxillium said. “You see, they all seemed to think that if you were skilled or well armed, you could take whatever you want. I was both, and yet instead of taking, I stopped them. They found it baffling.” “It was very brave of you,” Marasi said. He shrugged. “It wasn’t bravery, honestly. I just kind of fell into things.” “Even stopping the Surefires?” “They were a special case. I—” He froze. “How did you know about that?” “Reports trickle in,” Marasi said, blushing. “From the Roughs. Most of them get written up by someone. You can find them at the university or at the right bookshop.” “Oh.” Uncomfortable, he picked up his cup and drank some wine. As he did, something slipped into his mouth. He nearly spat out the entire mouthful in surprise. He contained himself. Barely. Wayne, I really am going to throttle you. He moved the object into his hand, covering the act with a cough. “Well,” Steris said, “hopefully the constables will soon deal with these ruffians and we can return to peace and law.” “Actually,” Marasi said, “I don’t think that’s likely.” “Child,” Lord Harms said sternly. “That’s quite enough.” “I’d like to hear what she has to say, my lord,” Waxillium said. “For the sake of conversation.” “Well … all right … I suppose.” “It’s simply a theory I had,” Marasi said, blushing. “Lord Ladrian, when you were lawkeeper in Weathering, what was the population of the city?” He fingered the item in his hand. A spent bullet casing that had been capped with a dab of wax. “Well, it started to grow rapidly in the last few years. But for most of the time, I’d say it was around fifteen hundred.” “And the surrounding area?” she asked. “All the places you’d patrol, but didn’t have their own lawkeepers?” “Maybe three thousand total,” Waxillium said. “Depending. There are a lot of transients out in the Roughs. People looking to find a mineral claim or to start up a farmstead. Workers moving from place to place.” “Let’s say three thousand,” Marasi said. “And how many of you were there? Those who helped you keep the law?” “Five or six, depending,” he said. “Wayne and I, and Barl most of the time. A few others on and off.” And Lessie, he thought. “Let’s say six per three thousand,” she said. “Gives us an easy number to work with. One lawman per five hundred people.” “What is the point of this?” Lord Harms asked sufferingly. “The population of our octant is around six hundred thousand,” she explained. “By the same ratio Lord Ladrian described, we should have roughly twelve hundred constables. But we don’t. It’s somewhere closer to six hundred, last I looked over the numbers. So, Lord Ladrian, your ‘savage’ wildlands actually had double the number of lawmen watching over it as we have here in the city.” “Huh,” he said. Odd information for a young woman of means to have. “I’m not trying to diminish your accomplishments,” she said quickly.
