I didn’t mean to offend or downplay your heroics.” “It’s all right,” he said. “But?” He shook his head. “I’m not sure if I can explain it. When I found my way out to the Roughs, when I started bringing in the warranted, I started to … Well, I thought I’d found a place where I was needed. I thought I’d found a way to do something that nobody else would do.” “But you did.” “And yet,” he said, stirring his soup, “it appears that all along, the place I left behind might have needed me even more. I’d never noticed.” “You did important work, Lord Ladrian. Vital work. Besides, I understand that before you arrived, nobody was upholding the law in that area.” “There was Arbitan,” he said, smiling, remembering the older man. “And, of course, the lawkeepers over in Far Dorest.” “A distant city and with a short reach,” she said, “which had a single capable lawman to serve a large population. Jon Deadfinger had his own problems. By the time you had built things up, Weathering was protected better than those in the City—but it did not start that way.” He nodded, though—again—he was curious about how much she knew. Were people really telling stories about him and Wayne all the way over here in the city? Why hadn’t he heard of them before now? Her statistics did bother him. He hadn’t thought of the City as dangerous. It was the Roughs, wild and untamed, that needed rescuing. The City was the land of plenty that Harmony had created to shelter mankind. Here, trees grew fruit in abundance and cultivated lands had water without need for irrigation. The ground was always fertile, and somehow never got farmed out. This land was supposed to be different. Protected. He’d put away his guns in part because he’d convinced himself that the constables could do their jobs without help. But don’t the Vanishers prove that might not be the case? Wayne returned with the bread and a bottle of wine, then stopped, looking at the two empty seats. “Oh dear,” he said. “Did you grow so tired of waiting that you devoured your two companions?” Marasi glanced at him and smiled. She knows, Waxillium realized. She recognizes him. “If I may note something, my lady,” Waxillium said, drawing her attention back. “You are far less unassuming than you were at our first meeting.” She winced. “I’m not very good at being shy, am I?” “I wasn’t aware it was something that required practice.” “I try all the time,” Wayne said, sitting down at the table and taking the baguette out of his basket. He took a healthy bite. “Nobody gives me any credit for it. ’S because I’m misunderstood, I tell you.” His Terris accent had vanished. Marasi looked confused. “Should I pretend to be aghast at what he’s doing?” she asked Waxillium in a hushed tone. “He saw that you’d recognized him,” Waxillium said. “Now he’s going to sulk.” “Sulk?” Wayne started eating Steris’s soup. “That’s right unkind, Wax. Ugh. This stuff is far worse than I was telling you guys. Sorry ’bout that.” “It will reflect in my tip,” Waxillium said dryly. “Lady Marasi, I was serious in my inquiry. To be frank, it seems that you’ve been trying to act with exaggerated timidity.” “Always looking down after you speak,” Wayne agreed. “Raising the pitch of your tone a little too much with questions.” “Not the type to be studying at the university at her own request,” Waxillium noted. “Why the act?” “I’d rather not say.” “You’d rather not,” Waxillium said, “or Lord Harms and his daughter would rather you not?” She blushed. “The latter. But please. I would really prefer to leave the topic.” “Ever charming, Wax,” Wayne said, taking another bite from the loaf of bread. “See that? You’ve pushed the lady almost to tears.” “I’m not—” Marasi began. “Ignore him,” Waxillium said. “Trust me. He’s like a rash. The more you scratch him, the more irritating he gets.” “Ouch,” Wayne said, though he grinned. “Aren’t you worried?” Marasi asked softly of Wayne. “You’re wearing a waiter’s uniform. If they see you sitting at the table and eating …” “Oh, that’s a good point,” Wayne said, tipping his chair back. The person behind him had left, and with Lord Harms gone, Wayne had just enough room to— —and there it was. He leaned his chair forward again, clothing changed back to a duster with a loose button-down shirt and thick Roughs trousers underneath. He spun his hat on his finger. The earrings were gone. Marasi jumped. “Speed bubble,” she whispered, sounding awed. “I thought I’d be able to see something from outside!” “You could, if you were watching closely,” Waxillium said. “A blur. If you look at the next table over, the sleeve of his waiter’s coat is sticking out from where he tossed it. His hat folds—though the sides are stiff, you can compress it between your hands. I’m still trying to figure out where he had the duster.” “Under your table,” Wayne said, sounding very self-satisfied. “Ah, of course,” Waxillium said. “He had to know beforehand which table would be ours so he could be assigned as our waiter.” I really should have looked under the table before we sat, Waxillium thought. Would that have seemed too paranoid? He didn’t feel paranoid; he didn’t lie awake at nights, worried that he’d be shot, or think that conspiracies were trying to destroy him. He just liked to be careful. Marasi was still looking at Wayne; she seemed bemused. “We aren’t what you expected,” Waxillium said. “From the reports you read?” “No,” she admitted. “The accounts usually omitted matters of personality.” “There are stories ’bout us?” Wayne asked. “Yes. Many.” “Damn.” He sounded impressed. “Do we get royalties for them or something? If we do, I want Wax’s share, seeing as to how I did all the stuff they say he did. Plus he’s already rich and all.” “They are news-style reports,” Marasi said. “Those don’t pay royalties to their subjects.” “Filthy cheats.” Wayne paused. “I wonder if any of the other fine ladies in this establishment have heard of my outrageously heroic and masculine exploits….” “Lady Marasi is a student at the university,” Waxillium said. “I’m assuming she read reports that are collected there. Most of the public won’t be familiar with them.” “That is true,” she said. “Oh,” Wayne said, sounding disappointed. “Well, maybe Lady Marasi herself might be interested in hearing more of my outrageously—” “Wayne?” “Yes.” “Enough.” “Right.” “I do apologize for him,” Waxillium said, turning to Marasi. She still wore the bemused expression on her face. “He does that a lot,” Wayne said. “Apologizing. I think it’s one of his personal failings. I try to help him out by being damn near perfect, but so far, that hasn’t been enough.” “It’s quite all right,” she said. “I do wonder if I should write something for my professors describing how … unique it was to meet you two.” “What is it, exactly, that you are studying at the university?” Waxillium asked. She hesitated, then blushed deeply. “Ah, see!” Wayne said. “Now, that’s how to act shy. You’re getting much better! Bravo.” “It’s just that …” She raised a hand to shade her eyes and looked down in embarrassment. “It’s just … Oh, all right. I’m studying legal justice and criminal behavioristics.” “That’s something to be ashamed of?” Waxillium said, sharing a confused look with Wayne. “Well, I’ve been told it’s not very feminine,” she said. “But beyond that … well, I’m sitting with you two … and … well, you know … you’re two of the most famous lawkeepers in the world, and all …” “Trust me,” Waxillium said. “We don’t know as much as you might think.” “Now, if you were studying buffoonery and idiotic behavior,” Wayne added, “that is something we’re experts on.” “That’s two things,” Waxillium said.
