Found out a lot about him in the trial, you see. Got to see his kids crying. And his wife …” Wayne reached into his pocket, then unfolded something. A sheet of paper. “Got a letter from them a few months back.” “They write you letters?” Marasi said. “Sure. I send them half of what I make. Keeps the kids fed, you know. Figure it makes sense, seein’ as to how I killed their daddy. One went to university.” He hesitated. “They still hate me. Write me the letters to let me know they haven’t forgiven me, that no money will bring back their daddy. They’re right. But they do take the money, so that’s something.” “Wayne …” Marasi said. “I’m so sorry.” “Yeah. Me too. Some mistakes, though, you can’t fix by being sorry. Can’t fix them, no matter what you do. Guns and me, we haven’t gotten along ever since. My hand starts shaking when I hold one, wobbling about like a damn fish dumped on the docks. Ain’t that the funniest thing? Like my hand thinks by itself.” The sound of footsteps came from the stairwell and a few moments later Waxillium walked in. He raised an eyebrow at the two of them sitting there on the floor. “See now,” Wayne said. “We’re having a heart-to-heart, here. Don’t go stomping in and making a mess of things.” “I wouldn’t dream of it,” Waxillium said. “I spoke with the local beggars. The Vanishers have been moving something large in and out of the building and onto a canal boat. They did it on several occasions, always at night. It seems to have been bigger than just cargo; some kind of machinery, I suspect.” “Huh,” Wayne said. “Huh indeed,” Waxillium said. “You?” “Found a box,” Wayne said, holding out the cigar box. “Oh, and some more dynamite. In case you want to blast out a new canal or something.” “Bring it,” Waxillium said. “Might be useful.” He took the cigar box. “There’s some nudie pictures too,” Wayne noted, pointing at the cupboard. “They’re so faded you can barely make out the good parts, though.” He hesitated. “The ladies ain’t wearing any guns, so you probably wouldn’t be interested anyway.” Waxillium snorted. “The cigar box is of an expensive variety,” Marasi said, standing up. “Unlikely to be from one of the common thieves, unless they took it from someone. But look. Someone wrote some numbers on the inside.” “Indeed,” Waxillium said. He narrowed his eyes, then looked at Wayne, who nodded. “What?” she said. “You know something?” Waxillium tossed the box back to Wayne, who tucked it away inside the pocket of his coat. It was large enough that it hung out. “Have you ever heard the name Miles Dagouter?” “Sure,” she said. “Miles Hundredlives. He’s a lawkeeper, out in the Roughs.” “Yes,” Waxillium said somberly. “Come on. I think it’s time for us to take a trip. While we go, I’ll tell you a few stories.”
