The other half of the room was strewn with boxes of various kinds of ammunition, bits of scrap metal, and cast barrels for gun making. There was dust everywhere. Very like her. He’d asked her for a way to prop up his paper pad, expecting her to find him an easel. She’d absently handed him some nails and pointed toward a hammer. So he’d just hung it on the wall, wincing as he drove the nails into the fine wood. He stepped up, using a pencil to scribble a note to himself in the corner. The pile of shipping manifests that Wayne had brought lay to the side. Apparently, Wayne had left a gun he’d borrowed from Ranette in place of the manifests, considering it a fair trade. It had probably never occurred to him that a group of train engineers would be completely baffled to find their manifests gone and a pistol in their place. Miles will strike at Carlo’s Bend, Wax thought, tapping the paper. It had been easy to locate a shipment of aluminum. House Tekiel, tired of being robbed, was indeed making a large fuss over their new vault-style railway car. Wax could understand the reasoning; the Tekiels were best known as bankers, and their business relied on security and asset protection. The robberies been become a major embarrassment to them. They were intending to recover in a visible way. It was almost like a dare to Miles and his Vanishers. Wax made another notation on his paper. The Tekiel shipment would follow a very direct route toward Doxonar. He’d mapped it, noting locations where the railway tracks wound close to one of the canals. I won’t be able to watch where we’re going, Wax thought, making another notation. I need to know exactly how far from the previous stop Carlo’s Bend is…. There wasn’t much time to prepare. He fingered the earring in his left hand, running his thumb along its smooth side as he thought. The door opened. Wax didn’t look up, but the sound of the footsteps was enough to tell him it was Marasi. Soft shoes. Ranette and Wayne both wore boots. Marasi cleared her throat. “Nets?” Wax asked, distractedly writing the number 35.17 on the paper. “I found some, finally,” she said, walking up beside him, looking over the notations. “You can make sense of this?” “For the most part. Except Wayne’s doodles.” “They … appear to be pictures of you. Unflatteringly ugly ones.” “That’s the part that doesn’t make sense,” Waxillium said. “Everyone knows I’m irreparably handsome.” He smiled to himself. That was one of Lessie’s phrases. Irreparably handsome. She’d always claimed he’d look better with a nice scar on his face, after good Roughs fashion. Marasi smiled too, though her eyes were on his notations and scribbling. “The phantom railcar?” she asked, pointing to his drawing of a ghostly train coming down the tracks, alongside a diagram of how it had probably been made. “Yes,” he said. “Most of the attacks happened on misty nights, apparently to make it much easier to hide the fact that the phantom ‘train’ is really just a false front with a large headlamp, attached to a moving rail platform.” “You’re certain?” “Reasonably,” Waxillium said. “They’re using the canals to attack, and so they need some sort of diversion to keep eyes off what is sneaking up behind.” She pursed her lips, thoughtful. “Was Wayne out there?” Waxillium asked. “Yes, he’s bothering Ranette. I … honestly left the room because I worried she’d shoot him.” Waxillium smiled. “I picked up a broadsheet when I was out,” she said. “The constables have found the old hideout.” “Already?” Waxillium said. “Wayne said we had until dark.” “It’s dark already.” “It is? Hell.” Waxillium checked his watch. They had less time than he’d thought. “It still shouldn’t be in the papers yet. The police found the hideout early.” Marasi nodded toward his sketches. “This indicates that you know where the Vanishers will strike. I don’t want to pound a brittle metal, Lord Waxillium, but we really should tell the constables that fact.” “I think I know where the attack will happen. If we let the constables know, they’ll flood the area and scare off Miles.” “Wax,” she said, stepping closer. “I understand that independent spirit; it’s part of what makes you what you are. But we’re not in the Roughs. You don’t have to do this all by yourself.” “I don’t intend to. I’ll involve the constables, I promise. Miles, however, is not an ordinary criminal. He knows what the constables will try, and he will watch for them. This has to be done at the right time, in the right way.” Waxillium tapped his notations on the wall. “I know Miles. I know how he thinks. He’s like me.” Almost too much so. “That means he can anticipate you too.” “He undoubtedly will. I’ll anticipate him better.” The moment Waxillium had drawn his gun and fired back against the Vanishers, he’d started down this path. Once he got his teeth into something, he didn’t let go. “You are right about me,” he said. “Right? I don’t believe I said anything about you, Lord Waxillium.” “You’re thinking it,” he said. “That I’m arrogant for wanting to do this my way, for not handing this over to the constables. That I’m foolhardy to not look for help. You’re right.” “It’s not so bad as that,” she said. “It’s not bad at all,” he said. “I am arrogant and foolhardy. I am acting like I’m still in the Roughs. But I’m also right.” He reached up, drawing a small square on the paper, then an arrow from it toward the precinct building. “I’ve written a letter for Ranette to send to the constables,” he continued. “It details everything I’ve discovered, and my guesses on what Miles will do, should I fail to best him. I won’t make any move tonight until we’re well away from the railway and any passengers. The Vanishers won’t take a hostage tonight. They’ll try to be as quick and as silent as possible. “But it will still be dangerous. People might die, innocent ones. I’ll try my best to keep them from harm, and I firmly believe I have a better chance against Miles than the constables would. I realize that you are studying to be an attorney and a judge, and that your training mandates you should go to the authorities. Considering my plans, and my promises, will you refrain and help me instead?” “Yes.” Harmony, he thought. She trusts me. Too much, probably. He reached up, squaring off a box of notes. “This is your part.” “I won’t be in the train car with you?” She sounded worried. “No,” Waxillium said. “You and Wayne will watch from the hilltop.” “You’ll be alone.” “I will.” She fell silent. “You knew what I was thinking of you. What are you thinking of me, Lord Waxillium?” He smiled. “If the game is to work the same way, I can’t tell you my thoughts. You need to guess them.” “You are thinking about how young I am,” she said. “And you’re worried about having me involved, lest I be hurt.” “Hardly a difficult guess. So far, I’ve given you what … three opportunities to abandon this course and seek safety?” “You’re also thinking,” she said, “that you’re glad I insist on staying, because I will be useful. Life has taught you to use the resources you have.” “Better,” he said. “You think I’m clever, as you have stated. But you also worry that I get flustered too easily, and worry it will be used against you.” “Do those records you’ve read talk about Paclo the Dusty?” “Sure. He was one of your deputies before you met Wayne.” “He was a good friend,” Waxillium said.
