If you ask me," he cried, "the Galactic Empire is dying!" 


He paused and dropped into his chair to catch his breath, paying no attention to the two or 
three that were attempting simultaneously to answer him. 

Crast got the floor. "I don't know what you're trying to gain by your hysterical statements, Mr. 
Mayor. Certainly, you are adding nothing constructive to the discussion. I move, Mr. Chairman, 
that the speaker's remarks be placed out of order and the discussion be resumed from the point 
where it was interrupted." 

Jord Fara bestirred himself for the first time. Up to this point Fara had taken no part in the 
argument even at its hottest. But now his ponderous voice, every bit as ponderous as his 
three-hundred-pound body, burst its bass way out. 

"Haven't we forgotten something, gentlemen?" 

"What?" asked Pirenne, peevishly. 

"That in a month we celebrate our fiftieth anniversary." Fara had a trick of uttering the most 
obvious platitudes with great profundity. 

"What of it?" 

"And on that anniversary," continued Fara, placidly, "Hari Seldon's Vault will open. Have you 
ever considered what might be in the Vault?" 

"I don't know. Routine matters. A stock Speech of congratulations, perhaps. I don't think any 
significance need be placed on the Vault - though the Journal'- and he glared at Hardin, who 
grinned back -"did try to make an issue of it. I put a stop to that." 

"Ah," said Fara, "but perhaps you are wrong. Doesn't it strike you" - he paused and put a finger 
to his round little nose -"that the Vault is opening at a very convenient time?" 

"Very inconvenient time, you mean," muttered Fulham. "We've got some other things to worry 
about." 

"Other things more important than a message from Hari Seldon? I think not." Fara was growing 
more pontifical than ever, and Hardin eyed him thoughtfully. What was he getting at? 

"In fact," said Fara, happily, "you all seem to forget that Seldon was the greatest psychologist of 
our time and that he was the founder of our Foundation. It seems reasonable to assume that he 
used his science to determine the probable course of the history of the immediate future. If he 
did, as seems likely, I repeat, he would certainly have managed to find a way to warn us of 
danger and, perhaps, to point out a solution. The Encyclopedia was very dear to his heart, you 
know." 

An aura of puzzled doubt prevailed. Pirenne hemmed. "Well, now, I don't know. Psychology is a 
great science, but-there are no psychologists among us at the moment, I believe. It seems to 
me we're on uncertain ground." 

Fara turned to Hardin. "Didn't you study psychology under Alurin?" 



Hardin answered, half in reverie: "Yes, I never completed my studies, though. I got tired of 
theory. I wanted to be a psychological engineer, but we lacked the facilities, so I did the next 
best thing - I went into politics. It's practically the same thing." 

"Well, what do you think of the Vault?" 

And Hardin replied cautiously, "I don't know." 

He did not say a word for the remainder of the meeting even though it got back to the subject of 
the Chancellor of the Empire. 

In fact, he didn't even listen. He'd been put on a new track and things were falling into 
place-just a little. Little angles were fitting together - one or two. 

And psychology was the key. He was sure of that. 

He was trying desperately to remember the psychological theory he had once learned - and 
from it he got one thing right at the start. 

A great psychologist such as Seldon could unravel human emotions and human reactions 
sufficiently to be able to predict broadly the historical sweep of the future. 

And what would that mean? 


4 . 

Lord Dorwin took snuff. He also had long hair, curled intricately and, quite obviously, artificially, 
to which were added a pair of fluffy, blond sideburns, which he fondled affectionately. Then, 
too, he spoke in overprecise statements and left out all the r's. 

At the moment, Hardin had no time to think of more of the reasons for the instant detestation in 
which he had held the noble chancellor. Oh, yes, the elegant gestures of one hand with which 
he accompanied his remarks and the studied condescension with which he accompanied even 
a simple affirmative. 

But, at any rate, the problem now was to locate him. He had disappeared with Pirenne half an 
hour before - passed clean out of sight, blast him. 

Hardin was quite sure that his own absence during the preliminary discussions would quite suit 
Pirenne. 

But Pirenne had been seen in this wing And on this floor. It was simply a matter of trying every 
door. Halfway down, he said, "Ah!" and stepped into the darkened room. The profile of Lord 
Dorwin's intricate hair-do was unmistakable against the lighted screen. 

Lord Dorwin looked up and said: "Ah, Hahdin. You ah looking foah us, no doubt?" He held out 
his snuffbox - overadorned and poor workmanship at that, noted Hardinand was politely 
refused whereat he helped himself to a pinch and smiled graciously. 



Pirenne scowled and Hardin met that with an expression of blank indifference. 

The only sound to break the short silence that followed was the clicking of the lid of Lord 
Dorwin's snuffbox. And then he put it away and said: 

"A gweat achievement, this Encyclopedia of yoahs, Hahdin. A feat, indeed, to rank with the 
most majestic accomplishments of all time." 

"Most of us think so, milord. It's an accomplishment not quite accomplished as yet, however." 

"Fwom the little I have seen of the efficiency of yoah Foundation, I have no feahs on that 
scoah." And he nodded to Pirenne, who responded with a delighted bow. 

Quite a love feast, thought Hardin. "I wasn't complaining about the lack of efficiency, milord, as 
much as of the definite excess of efficiency on the part of the Anacreonians - though in another 
and more destructive direction." 

"Ah, yes, Anacweon." A negligent wave of the hand. "I have just come from theah. Most 
bahbawous planet. It is thowoughly inconceivable that human beings could live heah in the 
Pewiphewy. The lack of the most elementawy wequiahments of a cultuahed gentleman; the 
absence of the most fundamental necessities foah comfoht and convenience - the uttah 
desuetude into which they-" 

Hardin interrupted dryly: "The Anacreonians, unfortunately, have all the elementary 
requirements for warfare and all the fundamental necessities for destruction." 

"Quite, quite." Lord Dorwin seemed annoyed, perhaps at being stopped midway in his 
sentence. "But we ahn't to discuss business now, y'know. Weally, I'm othahwise concuhned. 
Doctah Piwenne, ahn't you going to show me the second volume? Do, please." 

The lights clicked out and for the next half-hour Hardin might as well have been on Anacreon 
for all the attention they paid him. The book upon the screen made little sense to him, nor did 
he trouble to make the attempt to follow, but Lord Dorwin became quite humanly excited at 
times. Hardin noticed that during these moments of excitement the chancellor pronounced his 
r's. 

When the lights went on again, Lord Dorwin said: "Mahvelous. Twuly mahvelous. You ah not, 
by chance, intewested in ahchaeology, ah you, Hahdin?" 

"Eh?" Hardin shook himself out of an abstracted reverie. "No, milord, can't say I am. I'm a 
psychologist by original intention and a politician by final decision." 

"Ah! No doubt intewesting studies. 1 , myself, y'know" - he helped himself to a giant pinch of 
snuff -"dabble in ahchaeology." 

"Indeed?" 

"His lordship," interrupted Pirenne, "is most thoroughly acquainted with the field." 

"Well, p'haps I am, p'haps I am," said his lordship complacently. "I have done an awful amount 
of wuhk in the science. Extwemely well-read, in fact. I've gone thwough all of Jawdun, Obijasi, 



Kwomwill ... oh, all of them, y'know." 

"I've heard of them, of course," said Hardin, "but I've never read them." 

"You should some day, my deah fellow. It would amply repay you. Why, I cutainly considah it 
well wuhth the twip heah to the Pewiphewy to see this copy of Lameth. Would you believe it, 
my Libwawy totally lacks a copy. By the way, Doctah Piwenne, you have not fohgotten yoah 
pwomise to twansdevelop a copy foah me befoah I leave?" 

"Only too pleased." 

"Lameth, you must know," continued the chancellor, politically, "pwesents a new and most 
intwesting addition to my pwevious knowledge of the 'Owigin Question.'" 

"Which question?" asked Hardin. 

"The 'Owigin Question.' The place of the owigin of the human species, y'know. Suahly you must 
know that it is thought that owiginally the human wace occupied only one planetawy system." 

"Well, yes, I know that." 

"Of cohse, no one knows exactly which system it is - lost in the mists of antiquity. Theah ah 
theawies, howevah. Siwius, some say. Othahs insist on Alpha Centauwi, oah on Sol, oah on 61 
Cygni - all in the Siwius sectah, you see." 

"And what does Lameth say?"
