"Your door was open," the stranger explained. 

His accent was clipped and harsh, and Barr did not fail to notice the strange blue-steel 
hand-weapon at his hip. In the half gloom of the small room, Barr saw the glow of a force-shield 
surrounding the man. 

He said, wearily, "There is no reason to keep it closed. Do you wish anything of me?" 

"Yes." The stranger remained standing in the center of the room. He was large, both in height 
and bulk. "Yours is the only house about here." 

"It is a desolate place," agreed Barr, "but there is a town to the east. I can show you the way'." 



"In awhile. May I sit?" 

"If the chairs will hold you," said the old man, gravely. They were old, too. Relics of a better 
youth. 

The stranger said, "My name is Hober Mallow. I come from a far province." 

Barr nodded and smiled, "Your tongue convicted you of that long ago. I am Onum Barr of 
Siwenna - and once Patrician of the Empire." 

"Then this is Siwenna. I had only old maps to guide me." 

"They would have to be old, indeed, for star-positions to be misplaced." 

Barr sat quite still, while the other's eyes drifted away into a reverie. He noticed that the nuclear 
force-shield had vanished from about the man and admitted dryly to himself that his person no 
longer seemed formidable to strangers - or even, for good or for evil, to his enemies. 

He said, "My house is poor and my resources few. You may share what I have if your stomach 
can endure black bread and dried corn." 

Mallow shook his head, "No, I have eaten, and I can't stay. All I need are the directions to the 
center of government." 

"That is easily enough done, and poor though I am, deprives me of nothing. Do you mean the 
capital of the planet, or of the Imperial Sector?" 

The younger man's eyes narrowed, "Aren't the two identical? Isn't this Siwenna?" 

The old patrician nodded slowly, "Siwenna, yes. But Siwenna is no longer capital of the 
Normannic Sector. Your old map has misled you after all. The stars may not change even in 
centuries, but political boundaries are all too fluid." 

"That's too bad. In fact, that's very bad. Is the new capital far off?" 

"It's on Orsha II. Twenty parsecs off. Your map will direct you. How old is it?" 

"A hundred and fifty years." 

"That old?" The old man sighed. "History has been crowded since. Do you know any of it?" 
Mallow shook his bead slowly. 

Barr said, "You're fortunate. It has been an evil time for the provinces, but for the reign of 
Stannell VI, and he died fifty years ago. Since that time, rebellion and ruin, ruin and rebellion." 
Barr wondered if he were growing garrulous. It was a lonely life out here, and he had so little 
chance to talk to men. 

Mallow said with sudden sharpness, "Ruin, eh? You sound as if the province were 
impoverished." 

"Perhaps not on an absolute scale. The physical resources of twenty-five first-rank planets take 



a long time to use up. Compared to the wealth of the last century, though, we have gone a long 
way downhill - and there is no sign of turning, not yet. Why are you so interested in all this, 
young man? You are all alive and your eyes shine!" 

The trader came near enough to blushing, as the faded eyes seemed to look too deep into his 
and smile at what they saw. 

He said, "Now look here. I'm a trader out there - out toward the rim of the Galaxy. I've located 
some old maps, and I'm out to open new markets. Naturally, talk of impoverished provinces 
disturbs me. You can't get money out of a world unless money's there to be got. Now how's 
Siwenna, for instance?" 

The old man leaned forward, "I cannot say. It will do even yet, perhaps. But you a trader? You 
look more like a fighting man. You hold your hand near your gun and there is a scar on your 
jawbone." 

Mallow jerked his head, "There isn't much law out there where I come from. Fighting and scars 
are part of a trader's overhead. But fighting is only useful when there's money at the end, and if 
I can get it without, so much the sweeter. Now will I find enough money here to make it worth 
the fighting? I take it I can find the fighting easily enough." 

"Easily enough," agreed Barr. "You could join Wiscard's remnants in the Red Stars. I don't 
know, though, if you'd call that fighting or piracy. Or you could join our present gracious viceroy 
- gracious by right of murder, pillage, rapine, and the word of a boy Emperor, since rightfully 
assassinated." The patrician's thin cheeks reddened. His eyes closed and then opened, 
bird-bright. 

"You don't sound very friendly to the viceroy, Patrician Barr," said Mallow. "What if I'm one of 
his spies?" 

"What if you are?" said Barr, bitterly. "What can you take?" He gestured a withered arm at the 
bare interior of the decaying mansion. 

"Your life." 

"It would leave me easily enough. It has been with me five years too long. But you are not one 
of the viceroy's men. If you were, perhaps even now instinctive self-preservation would keep 
my mouth closed." 

"How do you know?" 

The old man laughed, "You seem suspicious - Come, I'll wager you think I'm trying to trap you 
into denouncing the government. No, no. I am past politics." 

"Past politics? Is a man ever past that? The words you used to describe the viceroy - what 
were they? Murder, pillage, all that. You didn't sound objective. Not exactly. Not as if you were 
past politics." 

The old man shrugged, "Memories sting when they come suddenly. Listen! Judge for yourself! 
When Siwenna was the provincial capital, I was a patrician and a member of the provincial 



senate. My family was an old and honored one. One of my great-grandfathers had been- No, 
never mind that. Past glories are poor feeding." 

"I take it," said Mallow, "there was a civil war, or a revolution." 

Barr's face darkened. "Civil wars are chronic in these degenerate days, but Siwenna had kept 
apart. Under Stannell VI, it had almost achieved its ancient prosperity. But weak emperors 
followed, and weak emperors mean strong viceroys, and our last viceroy - the same Wiscard, 
whose remnants still prey on the commerce among the Red Stars - aimed at the Imperial 
Purple. He wasn't the first to aim. And if he had succeeded, he wouldn't have been the first to 
succeed. 

"But he failed. For when the Emperor's Admiral approached the province at the head of a fleet, 
Siwenna itself rebelled against its rebel viceroy." He stopped, sadly. 

Mallow found himself tense on the edge of his seat, and relaxed slowly, "Please continue, sir." 

"Thank you," said Barr, wearily. "It's kind of you to humor an old man. They rebelled; or I should 
say, we rebelled, for I was one of the minor leaders. Wiscard left Siwenna, barely ahead of us, 
and the planet, and with it the province, were thrown open to the admiral with every gesture of 
loyalty to the Emperor. Why we did this, -I'm not sure. Maybe we felt loyal to the symbol, if not 
the person, of the Emperor, -a cruel and vicious child. Maybe we feared the horrors of a siege." 

"Well?" urged Mallow, gently. 

"Well, came the grim retort, "that didn't suit the admiral. He wanted the glory of conquering a 
rebellious province and his men wanted the loot such conquest would involve. So while the 
people were still gathered in every large city, cheering the Emperor and his admiral, he 
occupied all armed centers, and then ordered the population put to the nuclear blast." 

"On what pretext?" 

"On the pretext that they had rebelled against their viceroy, the Emperor's anointed. And the 
admiral became the new viceroy, by virtue of one month of massacre, pillage and complete 
horror. I had six sons. Five died - variously. I had a daughter. I hope she died, eventually. / 
escaped because I was old. I came here, too old to cause even our viceroy worry." He bent his 
gray head, "They left me nothing, because I had helped drive out a rebellious governor and 
deprived an admiral of his glory." 

Mallow sat silent, and waited. Then, "What of your sixth son?" he asked softly. 

"Eh?" Barr smiled acidly. "He is safe, for he has joined the admiral as a common soldier under 
an assumed name. He is a gunner in the viceroy's personal fleet. Oh, no, I see your eyes. He is 
not an unnatural son. He visits me when he can and gives me what he can. He keeps me alive. 
And some day, our great and glorious viceroy will grovel to his death, and it will be my son who 
will be his executioner."
