"On the contrary. That was the time to begin all-out prevention of war. I played them one 
against the other. I helped each in turn. I offered them science, trade, education, scientific 
medicine. I made Terminus of more value to them as a flourishing world than as a military prize. 
It worked for thirty years." 

"Yes, but you were forced to surround these scientific gifts with the most outrageous mummery. 
You've made half religion, half balderdash out of it. You've erected a hierarchy of priests and 
complicated, meaningless ritual." 

Hardin frowned. "What of that? I don't see that it has anything to do with the argument at all. I 
started that way at first because the barbarians looked upon our science as a sort of magical 
sorcery, and it was easiest to get them to accept it on that basis. The priesthood built itself and 
if we help it along we are only following the line of least resistance. It is a minor matter." 

"But these priests are in charge of the power plants. That is not a minor matter." 

"True, but we have trained them. Their knowledge of their tools is purely empirical; and they 
have a firm belief in the mummery that surrounds them." 

"And if one pierces through the mummery, and has the genius to brush aside empiricism, what 
is to prevent him from learning actual techniques, and selling out to the most satisfactory 
bidder? What price our value to the kingdoms, then?" 

"Little chance of that, Sermak. You are being superficial. The best men on the planets of the 
kingdoms are sent here to the Foundation each year and educated into the priesthood. And the 
best of these remain here as research students. If you think that those who are left, with 
practically no knowledge of the elements of science, or worse, still, with the distorted 
knowledge the priests receive, can penetrate at a bound to nuclear power, to electronics, to the 
theory of the hyperwarp - you have a very romantic and very foolish idea of science. It takes 
lifetimes of training and an excellent brain to get that far." 

Yohan Lee had risen abruptly during the foregoing speech and left the room. He had returned 
now and when Hardin finished speaking, he bent to his superior's ear. A whisper was 
exchanged and then a leaden cylinder. Then, with one short hostile look at the deputation, Lee 
resumed his chair. 

Hardin turned the cylinder end for end in his hands, watching the deputation through his lashes. 
And then he opened it with a hard, sudden twist and only Sermak had the sense not to throw a 
rapid look at the rolled paper that fell out. 

"In short, gentlemen," he said, "the Government is of the opinion that it knows what it is doing." 

He read as he spoke. There were the lines of intricate, meaningless code that covered the 
page and the three penciled words scrawled in one comer that carried the message. He took it 
in at a glance and tossed it casually into the incinerator shaft. 

"That," Hardin then said, "ends the interview, I'm afraid. Glad to have met you all. Thank you for 
coming." He shook hands with each in perfunctory fashion, and they filed out. 

Hardin had almost gotten out of the habit of laughing, but after Sermak and his three silent 



partners were well out of earshot, he indulged in a dry chuckle and bent an amused look on 
Lee. 

"How did you like that battle of bluffs, Lee?" 

Lee snorted grumpily. "I'm not sure that he was bluffing. Treat him with kid gloves and he's 
quite liable to win the next election, just as he says." 

"Oh, quite likely, quite likely - if nothing happens first." 

"Make sure they don't happen in the wrong direction this time, Hardin. I tell you this Sermak has 
a following. What if he doesn't wait till the next election? There was a time when you and I put 
things through violently, in spite of your slogan about what violence is." 

Hardin cocked an eyebrow. "You are pessimistic today, Lee. And singularly contrary, too, or 
you wouldn't speak of violence. Our own little putsch was carried through without loss of life, 
you remember. It was a necessary measure put through at the proper moment, and went over 
smoothly, painlessly, and all but effortlessly. As for Sermak, he's up against a different 
proposition. You and I, Lee, aren't the Encyclopedists. We stand prepared. Order your men 
onto these youngsters in a nice way, old fellow. Don't let them know they're being watched - 
but eyes open, you understand." 

Lee laughed in sour amusement. "I'd be a fine one to wait for your orders, wouldn't I, Hardin? 
Sermak and his men have been under surveillance for a month now." 

The mayor chuckled. "Got in first, did you? All right. By the way," he observed, and added 
softly, "Ambassador Verisof is returning to Terminus. Temporarily, I hope." 

There was a short silence, faintly horrified, and then Lee said, "Was that the message? Are 
things breaking already?" 

"Don't know. I can't tell till I hear what Verisof has to say. They may be, though. After all, they 
have to before election. But what are you looking so dead about?" 

"Because I don't know how it's going to turn out. You're too deep, Hardin, and you're playing 
the game too close to your chest." 

"Even you?" murmured Hardin. And aloud, "Does that mean you're going to join Sermak's new 
party?" 

Lee smiled against his will. "All right. You win. How about lunch now?" 


2 . 

There are many epigrams attributed to Hardin - a confirmed epigrammatist - a good many of 
which are probably apocryphal. Nevertheless, it is reported that on a certain occasion, he said: 

"It pays to be obvious, especially if you have a reputation for subtlety." 

Poly Verisof had had occasion to act on that advice more than once for he was now in the 



fourteenth year of his double status on Anacreon - a double status the upkeep of which 
reminded him often and unpleasantly of a dance performed barefoot on hot metal. 

To the people of Anacreon he was high priest, representative of that Foundation which, to 
those "barbarians," was the acme of mystery and the physical center of this religion they had 
created - with Hardin's help - in the last three decades. As such, he received a homage that 
had become horribly wearying, for from his soul he despised the ritual of which he was the 
center. 

But to the King of Anacreon - the old one that had been, and the young grandson that was now 
on the throne - he was simply the ambassador of a power at once feared and coveted. 

On the whole, it was an uncomfortable job, and his first trip to the Foundation in three years, 
despite the disturbing incident that had made it necessary, was something in the nature of a 
holiday. 

And since it was not the first time he had had to travel in absolute secrecy, he again made use 
of Hardin's epigram on the uses of the obvious. 

He changed into his civilian clothes - a holiday in itself - and boarded a passenger liner to the 
Foundation, second class. Once at Terminus, he threaded his way through the crowd at the 
spaceport and called up City Hall at a public visiphone. 

He said, "My name is Jan Smite. I have an appointment with the mayor this afternoon." 

The dead-voiced but efficient young lady at the other end made a second connection and 
exchanged a few rapid words, then said to Verisof in dry, mechanical tone, "Mayor Hardin will 
see you in half an hour, sir," and the screen went blank. 

Whereupon the ambassador to Anacreon bought the latest edition of the Terminus City Journal, 
sauntered casually to City Hall Park and, sitting, down on the first empty bench he came to, 
read the editorial page, sport section and comic sheet while waiting. At the end of half an hour, 
he tucked the paper under his arm, entered City Hall and presented himself in the anteroom. 

In doing all this he remained safely and thoroughly unrecognized, for since he was so entirely 
obvious, no one gave him a second look. 

Hardin looked up at him and grinned. "Have a cigar! How was the trip?" 

Verisof helped himself. "Interesting. There was a priest in the next cabin on his way here to 
take a special course in the preparation of radioactive synthetics - for the treatment of cancer, 
you know 

"Surely, he didn't call it radioactive synthetics, now?" 

"I guess not! It was the Holy Food to him." 

The mayor smiled. "Go on." 

"He inveigled me into a theological discussion and did his level best to elevate me out of sordid 
materialism." 



"And never recognized his own high priest?" 

"Without my crimson robe? Besides, he was a Smyrnian. It was an interesting experience, 
though. It is remarkable, Hardin, how the religion of science has grabbed hold. I've written an 
essay on the subject - entirely for my own amusement; it wouldn't do to have it published. 
Treating the problem sociologically, it would seem that when the old Empire began to rot at the 
fringes, it could be considered that science, as science, had failed the outer worlds. To be 
reaccepted it would have to present itself in another guise and it has done just that. It works out 
beautifully."
