Jael's brow furrowed. He said, quietly, "What's it going to be? Korell, after all?" 

Mallow nodded, "Of course. They'll declare war, eventually, though I'm betting it'll take another 
pair of years." 

"With nuclear ships?" 

"What do you think? Those three merchant ships we lost in their space sector weren't knocked 
over with compressed-air pistols. Jael, they're getting ships from the Empire itself. Don't open 
your mouth like a fool. I said the Empire! It's still there, you know. It many be gone here in the 
Periphery but in the Galactic center it's still very much alive. And one false move means that it, 
itself, may be on our neck. That's why I must be mayor and high priest. I'm the only man who 
knows how to fight the crisis." 

Jael swallowed dryly, "How? What are you going to do?" 



"Nothing." 

Jael smiled uncertainly, "Really! All of that!" 

But Mallow's answer was incisive, "When I'm boss of this Foundation, I'm going to do nothing. 
One hundred percent of nothing, and that is the secret of this crisis." 


16 . 

Asper Argo, the Well-Beloved, Commdor of the Korellian Republic greeted his wife's entry by a 
hangdog lowering of his scanty eyebrows. To her at least, his self-adopted epithet did not 
apply. Even he knew that. 

She said, in a voice as sleek as her hair and as cold as her eyes, "My gracious lord, I 
understand, has finally come to a decision upon the fate of the Foundation upstarts." 

"Indeed?" said the Commdor, sourly. "And what more does your versatile understanding 
embrace?" 

"Enough, my very noble husband. You had another of your vacillating consultations with your 
councilors. Fine advisors." With infinite scorn, "A herd of palsied purblind idiots hugging their 
sterile profits close to their sunken chests in the face of my father's displeasure." 

"And who, my dear," was the mild response, "is the excellent source from which your 
understanding understands all this?" 

The Commdora laughed shortly, "If I told you, my source would be more corpse than source." 

"Well, you'll have your own way, as always." The Commdor shrugged and turned away. "And 
as for your father's displeasure: I much fear me it extends to a niggardly refusal to supply more 
ships." 

"More ships!" She blazed away, hotly, "And haven't you five? Don't deny it. I know you have 
five; and a sixth is promised." 

"Promised for the last year." 

"But one - just one - can blast that Foundation into stinking rubble. Just one! One, to sweep 
their little pygmy boats out of space." 

"I couldn't attack their planet, even with a dozen." 

"And how long would their planet hold out with their trade ruined, and their cargoes of toys and 
trash destroyed?" "Those toys and trash mean money," he sighed. "A good deal of money." 

"But if you had the Foundation itself, would you not have all it contained'? And if you had my 
father's respect and gratitude, would you not have more than ever the Foundation could give 
you? It's been three years - more - since that barbarian came with his magic sideshow. It's 
long enough." 



"My dear!" The Commdor turned and faced her. "I am growing old. I am weary. I lack the 
resilience to withstand your rattling mouth. You say you know that I have decided. Well, I have. 
It is over, and there is war between Korell and the Foundation." 

"Well!" The Commdora's figure expanded and her eyes sparkled, "You learned wisdom at last, 
though in your dotage. And now when you are master of this hinterland, you may be sufficiently 
respectable to be of some weight and importance in the Empire. For one thing, we might leave 
this barbarous world and attend the viceroy's court. Indeed we might." 

She swept out, with a smile, and a hand on her hip. Her hair gleamed in the light. 

The Commdor waited, and then said to the closed door, with malignance and hate, "And when I 
am master of what you call the hinterland, I may be sufficiently respectable to do without your 
father's arrogance and his daughter's tongue. Completely - without!" 


17 . 

The senior lieutenant of the Dark Nebula stared in horror at the visiplate. 

"Great Galloping Galaxies!" It should have been a howl, but it was a whisper instead, "What's 
that?" 

It was a ship, but a whale to the Dark Nebula's minnow; and on its side was the 
Spaceship-and-Sun of the Empire. Every alarm on the ship yammered hysterically. 

The orders went out, and the Dark Nebula prepared to run if it could, and fight if it must, -while 
down in the hyperwave room, a message stormed its way through hyperspace to the 
Foundation. 

Over and over again! Partly a plea for help, but mainly a warning of danger. 


18 . 

Flober Mallow shuffled his feet wearily as he leafed through the reports. Two years of the 
mayoralty had made him a bit more housebroken, a bit softer, a bit more patient, -but it had not 
made him learn to like government reports and the mind-breaking officialese in which they were 
written. 

"Flow many ships did they get?" asked Jael. 

"Four trapped on the ground. Two unreported. All others accounted for and safe." Mallow 
grunted, "We should have done better, but it's just a scratch." 

There was no answer and Mallow looked up, "Does anything worry you?" 

"I wish Sutt would get here," was the almost irrelevant answer. 

"Ah, yes, and now we'll hear another lecture on the home front." 



"No, we won't," snapped Jael, "but you're stubborn, Mallow. You may have worked out the 
foreign situation to the last detail but you've never given a care about what goes on here on the 
home planet." 

"Well, that's your job, isn't it? What did I make you Minister of Education and Propaganda for?" 

"Obviously to send me to an early and miserable grave, for all the co-operation you give me. 

For the last year, I've been deafening you with the rising danger of Sutt and his Religionists. 
What good will your plans be, if Sutt forces a special election and has you thrown out?" 

"None, I admit." 

"And your speech last night just about handed the election to Sutt with a smile and a pat. Was 
there any necessity for being so frank?" 

"Isn't there such a thing as stealing Sutt's thunder?" 

"No," said Jael, violently, "not the way you did it. You claim to have foreseen everything, and 
don't explain why you traded with Korell to their exclusive benefit for three years. Your only plan 
of battle is to retire without a battle. You abandon all trade with the sectors of space near Korell. 
You openly proclaim a stalemate. You promise no offensive, even in the future. Galaxy, Mallow, 
what am I supposed to do with such a mess?" 

"It lacks glamor?" 

"It lacks mob emotion-appeal." 

"Same thing." 

"Mallow, wake up. You have two alternatives. Either you present the people with a dynamic 
foreign policy, whatever your private plans are, or you make some sort of compromise with 
Sutt." 

Mallow said, "All right, if I've failed the first, let's try the second. Sutt's just arrived." 

Sutt and Mallow had not met personally since the day of the trial, two years back. Neither 
detected any change in the other, except for that subtle atmosphere about each which made it 
quite evident that the roles of ruler and defier had changed. 

Sutt took his seat without shaking hands. 

Mallow offered a cigar and said, "Mind if Jael stays? He wants a compromise earnestly. He can 
act as mediator if tempers rise." 

Sutt shrugged, "A compromise will be well for you. Upon another occasion I once asked you to 
state your terms. I presume the positions are reversed now." 

"You presume correctly." 

"Then there are my terms. You must abandon your blundering policy of economic bribery and 
trade in gadgetry, and return to the tested foreign policy of our fathers." 



"You mean conquest by missionary." 

"Exactly." 

"No compromise short of that?" 

"None." 

"Um-m-m." Mallow lit up very slowly and inhaled the tip of his cigar into a bright glow. "In 
Hardin's time, when conquest by missionary was new and radical, men like yourself opposed it. 
Now it is tried, tested, hallowed, -everything a Jorane Sutt would find well. But, tell me, how 
would you get us out of our present mess?" 

"Your present mess. I had nothing to do with it." 

"Consider the question suitably modified." 

"A strong offensive is indicated. The stalemate you seem to be satisfied with is fatal. It would be 
a confession of weakness to all the worlds of the Periphery, where the appearance of strength 
is all-important, and there's not one vulture among them that wouldn't join the assault for its 
share of the corpse. You ought to understand that. You're from Smyrno, aren't you?" 

Mallow passed over the significance of the remark. He said, "And if you beat Korell, what of the 
Empire? That is the real enemy."
