Again the note of near-pleading in his voice. Again no answer. 

He went on: "And you men and half of Terminus as well are just as bad. We sit here, 
considering the Encyclopedia the all-in-all. We consider the greatest end of science, is the 
classification of past data. It is important, but is there no further work to be done? We're 
receding and forgetting, don't you see? Here in the Periphery they've lost nuclear power. In 
Gamma Andromeda, a power plant has undergone meltdown because of poor repairs, and the 
Chancellor of the Empire complains that nuclear technicians are scarce. And the solution? To 
train new ones? Never! Instead they're to restrict nuclear power." 

And for the third time: "Don't you see? It's Galaxywide. It's a worship of the past. It's a 
deterioration - a stagnation!" 

He stared from one to the other and they gazed fixedly at him. 

Fara was the first to recover. "Well, mystical philosophy isn't going to help us here. Let us be 
concrete. Do you deny that Hari Seldon could easily have worked out historical trends of the 
future by simple psychological technique?" 

"No, of course not," cried Hardin. "But we can't rely on him for a solution. At best, he might 
indicate the problem, but if ever there is to be a solution, we must work it out ourselves. He 
can't do it for us." 

Fulham spoke suddenly. "What do you mean - 'indicate the problem'? We know the problem." 

Hardin whirled on him. "You think you do? You think Anacreon is all Hari Seldon is likely to be 
worried about. I disagree! I tell you, gentlemen, that as yet none of you has the faintest 
conception of what is really going on." 

"And you do?" questioned Pirenne, hostilely. 



"I think so!" Hardin jumped up and pushed his chair away. His eyes were cold and hard. "If 
there's one thing that's definite, it is that there's something smelly about the whole situation; 
something that is bigger than anything we've talked about yet. Just ask yourself this question: 
Why was it that among the original population of the Foundation not one first-class psychologist 
was included, except Bor Alurin? And he carefully refrained from training his pupils in more 
than the fundamentals." 

A short silence and Fara said: "All right. Why?" 

"Perhaps because a psychologist might have caught on to what this was all about - and too 
soon to suit Hari Seldon. As it is, we've been stumbling about, getting misty glimpses of the 
truth and no more. And that is what Hari Seldon wanted." 

He laughed harshly. "Good day, gentlemen!" 

He stalked out of the room. 


6 . 

Mayor Hardin chewed at the end of his cigar. It had gone out but he was past noticing that. He 
hadn't slept the night before and he had a good idea that he wouldn't sleep this coming night. 
His eyes showed it. 

He said wearily, "And that covers it?" 

"I think so." Yohan Lee put a hand to his chin. "How does it sound?" 

"Not too bad. It's got to be done, you understand, with impudence. That is, there is to be no 
hesitation; no time to allow them to grasp the situation. Once we are in a position to give 
orders, why, give them as though you were born to do so, and they'll obey out of habit. That's 
the essence of a coup." 

"If the Board remains irresolute for even 

"The Board? Count them out. After tomorrow, their importance as a factor in Terminus affairs 
won't matter a rusty half-credit." 

Lee nodded slowly. "Yet it is strange that they've done nothing to stop us so far. You say they 
weren't entirely in the dark." 

"Fara stumbles at the edges of the problem. Sometimes he makes me nervous. And Pirenne's 
been suspicious of me since I was elected. But, you see, they never had the capacity of really 
understanding what was up. Their whole training has been authoritarian. They are sure that the 
Emperor, just because he is the Emperor, is all-powerful. And they are sure that the Board of 
Trustees, simply because it is the Board of Trustees acting in the name of the Emperor, cannot 
be in a position where it does not give the orders. That incapacity to recognize the possibility of 
revolt is our best ally." 

He heaved out of his chair and went to the water cooler. "They're not bad fellows, Lee, when 



they stick to their Encyclopedia - and we'll see that that's where they stick in the future. They're 
hopelessly incompetent when it comes to ruling Terminus. Go away now and start things 
rolling. I want to be alone." 

He sat down on the comer of his desk and stared at the cup of water. 

Space! If only he were as confident as he pretended! The Anacreonians were landing in two 
days and what had he to go on but a set of notions and half-guesses as to what Had Seldon 
had been driving at these past fifty years? He wasn't even a real, honest-to-goodness 
psychologist - just a tumbler with a little training trying to outguess the greatest mind of the 
age. 

If Fara were fight; if Anacreon were all the problem Hari Seldon had foreseen; if the 
Encyclopedia were all he was interested in preserving - then what price coup d'etat? 

He shrugged and drank his water. 


7 . 

The Vault was furnished with considerably more than six chairs, as though a larger company 
had been expected. Hardin noted that thoughtfully and seated himself wearily in a comer just 
as far from the other five as possible. 

The Board members did not seem to object to that arrangement. They spoke among 
themselves in whispers, which fell off into sibilant monosyllables, and then into nothing at all. Of 
them all, only Jord Fara seemed even reasonably calm. He had produced a watch and was 
staring at it somberly. 

Hardin glanced at his own watch and then at the glass cubicle - absolutely empty - that 
dominated half the room. It was the only unusual feature of the room, for aside from that there 
was no indication that somewhere a computer was splitting off instants of time toward that 
precise moment when a muon stream would flow, a connection be made and- 

The lights went dim! 

They didn't go out, but merely yellowed and sank with a suddenness that made Hardin jump. 

He had lifted his eyes to the ceiling lights in startled fashion, and when he brought them down 
the glass cubicle was no longer empty. 

A figure occupied it , a figure in a wheel chair! 

It said nothing for a few moments, but it closed the book upon its lap and fingered it idly. And 
then it smiled, and the face seemed all alive. 

It said, "I am Hari Seldon." The voice was old and soft. 

Hardin almost rose to acknowledge the introduction and stopped himself in the act. 

The voice continued conversationally: "As you see, I am confined to this chair and cannot rise 



to greet you. Your grandparents left for Terminus a few months back in my time and since then 
I have suffered a rather inconvenient paralysis. I can't see you, you know, so I can't greet you 
properly. I don't even know how many of you there are, so all this must be conducted 
informally. If any of you are standing, please sit down; and if you care to smoke, I wouldn't 
mind." There was a light chuckle. "Why should I? I'm not really here." 

Hardin fumbled for a cigar almost automatically, but thought better of it. 

Hari Seldon put away his book - as if laying it upon a desk at his side - and when his fingers let 
go, it disappeared. 

He said: "It is fifty years now since this Foundation was established - fifty years in which the 
members of the Foundation have been ignorant of what it was they were working toward. It was 
necessary that they be ignorant, but now the necessity is gone. 

"The Encyclopedia Foundation, to begin with, is a fraud, and always has been!" 

There was a sound of a scramble behind Hardin and one or two muffled exclamations, but he 
did not turn around. 

Hari Seldon was, of course, undisturbed. He went on: "It is a fraud in the sense that neither I 
nor my colleagues care at all whether a single volume of the Encyclopedia is ever published. It 
has served its purpose, since by it we extracted an imperial charter from the Emperor, by it we 
attracted the hundred thousand humans necessary for our scheme, and by it we managed to 
keep them preoccupied while events shaped themselves, until it was too late for any of them to 
draw back. 

"In the fifty years that you have worked on this fraudulent project - there is no use in softening 
phrases - your retreat has been cut off, and you have now no choice but to proceed on the 
infinitely more important project that was, and is, our real plan.
