Sef Sermak was second from the right, the youngest of the young group - and the most 
interesting with his bristly yellow mustache trimmed precisely, and his sunken eyes of uncertain 
color. The other three Hardin dismissed almost immediately; they were rank and file on the face 
of them. It was on Sermak that he concentrated, the Sermak who had already, in his first term 
in the City Council, turned that sedate body topsy-turvy more than once, and it was to Sermak 
that he said: 



"I've been particularly anxious to see you, Councilman, ever since your very excellent speech 
last month. Your attack on the foreign policy of this government was a most capable one." 

Sermak's eyes smoldered. "Your interest honors me. The attack may or may not have been 
capable, but it was certainly justified." 

"Perhaps! Your opinions are yours, of course. Still you are rather young." 

Dryly. "It is a fault that most people are guilty of at some period of their life. You became mayor 
of the city when you were two years younger than I am now." 

Hardin smiled to himself. The yearling was a cool customer. He said, "I take it now that you 
have come to see me concerning this same foreign policy that annoys you so greatly in the 
Council Chamber. Are you speaking for your three colleagues, or must I listen to each of you 
separately?" There were quick mutual glances among the four young men, a slight flickering of 
eyelids. 

Sermak said grimly, "I speak for the people of Terminus - a people who are not now truly 
represented in the rubberstamp body they call the Council." 

"I see. Go ahead, then!" 

"It comes to this, Mr. Mayor. We are dissatisfied-" 

"By 'we' you mean 'the people,' don't you?" 

Sermak stared hostilely, sensing a trap, and replied coldly, "I believe that my views reflect those 
of the majority of the voters of Terminus. Does that suit you?" 

"Well, a statement like that is all the better for proof, but go on, anyway. You are dissatisfied." 

"Yes, dissatisfied with the policy which for thirty years had been stripping Terminus defenseless 
against the inevitable attack from outside." 

"I see. And therefore? Go on, go on." 

"It's nice of you to anticipate. And therefore we are forming a new political party; one that will 
stand for the immediate needs of Terminus and not for a mystic 'manifest destiny' of future 
Empire. We are going to throw you and your lick-spittle clique of appeasers out of City Hall-and 
that soon." 

"Unless? There's always an 'unless,' you know." 

"Not much of one in this case: Unless you resign now. I'm not asking you to change your 
policies - I wouldn't trust you that far. Your promises are worth nothing. An outright resignation 
is all we'll take." 

"I see." Hardin crossed his legs and teetered his chair back on two legs. "That's your ultimatum. 
Nice of you to give me warning. But, you see, I rather think I'll ignore it." 

"Don't think it was a warning, Mr. Mayor. It was an announcement of principles and of action. 
The new party has already been formed, and it will begin its official activities tomorrow. There is 



neither room nor desire for compromise, and, frankly, it was only our recognition of your 
services to the City that induced us to offer the easy way out. I didn't think you'd take it, but my 
conscience is clear. 

The next election will be a more forcible and quite irresistible reminder that resignation is 
necessary." 

He rose and motioned the rest up. 

Hardin lifted his arm. "Hold on! Sit down!" 

Sef Sermak seated himself once more with just a shade too much alacrity and Hardin smiled 
behind a straight face. In spite of his words, he was waiting for an offer. 

Hardin said, "In exactly what way do you want our foreign policy changed? Do you want us to 
attack the Four Kingdoms, now, at once, and all four simultaneously?" 

"I make no such suggestion, Mr. Mayor. It is our simple proposition that all appeasement cease 
immediately. Throughout your administration, you have carried out a policy of scientific aid to 
the Kingdoms. You have given them nuclear power. You have helped rebuild power plants on 
their territories. You have established medical clinics, chemical laboratories and factories." 

"Well? And your objection?" 

"You have done this in order to keep them from attacking us. With these as bribes, you have 
been playing the fool in a colossal game of blackmail, in which you have allowed Terminus to 
be sucked dry - with the result that now we are at the mercy of these barbarians." 

"In what way?" 

"Because you have given them power, given them weapons, actually serviced the ships of their 
navies, they are infinitely stronger than they were three decades ago. Their demands are 
increasing, and with their new weapons, they will eventually satisfy all their demands at once by 
violent annexation of Terminus. Isn't that the way blackmail usually ends?" 

"And your remedy?" 

"Stop the bribes immediately and while you can. Spend your effort in strengthening Terminus 
itself - and attack first!" 

Hardin watched the young fellow's little blond mustache with an almost morbid interest. Sermak 
felt sure of himself or he wouldn't talk so much. There was no doubt that his remarks were the 
reflection of a pretty huge segment of the population, pretty huge. 


His voice did not betray the slightly perturbed current of his thoughts. If was almost negligent. 
"Are you finished?" 

"For the moment." 

"Well, then, do you notice the framed statement I have on the wall behind me? Read it, if you 



will! 


Sermak's lips twitched. "It says: 'Violence is the last refuge of the incompetent.' That's an old 
man's doctrine, Mr. Mayor." 

"I applied it as a young man, Mr. Councilman - and successfully. You were busily being born 
when it happened, but perhaps you may have read something of it in school." 

He eyed Sermak closely and continued in measured tones, "When Hari Seldon established the 
Foundation here, it was for the ostensible purpose of producing a great Encyclopedia, and for 
fifty years we followed that will-of-the-wisp, before discovering what he was really after. By that 
time, it was almost too late. When communications with the central regions of the old Empire 
broke down, we found ourselves a world of scientists concentrated in a single city, possessing 
no industries, and surrounded by newly created kingdoms, hostile and largely barbarous. We 
were a tiny island of nuclear power in this ocean of barbarism, and an infinitely valuable prize. 

"Anacreon, then as now, the most powerful of the Four Kingdoms, demanded and later actually 
established a military base upon Terminus, and the then rulers of the City, the Encyclopedists, 
knew very well that this was only a preliminary to taking over the entire planet. That is how 
matters stood when I ... uh ... assumed actual government. What would you have done?" 

Sermak shrugged his shoulders. "That's an academic question. Of course, I know what you 
did." 

"I'll repeat it, anyway. Perhaps you don't get the point. The temptation was great to muster what 
force we could and put up a fight. It's the easiest way out, and the most satisfactory to 
self-respect - but, nearly invariably, the stupidest. You would have done it; you and your talk of 
'attack first.' What I did, instead, was to visit the three other kingdoms, one by one; point out to 
each that to allow the secret of nuclear power to fall into the hands of Anacreon was the 
quickest way of cutting their own throats; and suggest gently that they do the obvious thing. 

That was all. One month after the Anacreonian force had landed on Terminus, their king 
received a joint ultimatum from his three neighbors. In seven days, the last Anacreonian was off 
Terminus. 

Now tell me, where was the need for violence?" 

The young councilman regarded his cigar stub thoughtfully and tossed it into the incinerator 
chute. "I fail to see the analogy. Insulin will bring a diabetic to normal without the faintest need 
of a knife, but appendicitis needs an operation. You can't help that. When other courses have 
failed, what is left but, as you put it, the last refuge? It's your fault that we're driven to it." 

"I? Oh, yes, again my policy of appeasement. You still seem to lack grasp of the fundamental 
necessities of our position. Our problem wasn't over with the departure of the Anacreonians. 
They had just begun. The Four Kingdoms were more our enemies than ever, for each wanted 
nuclear power-and each was kept off our throats only for fear of the other three. We are 
balanced on the point of a very sharp sword, and the slightest sway in any direction - If, for 
instance, one kingdom becomes too strong; or if two form a coalition - You understand?" 

"Certainly. That was the time to begin all-out preparations for war."
