"Obligations of Anacreon to the Empire: None! 



Powers of the Empire over Anacreon: None!" 


Again the five followed the reasoning anxiously, checking carefully back to the treaty, and when 
they were finished, Pirenne said in a worried fashion, "That seems to be correct." 

"You admit, then, that the treaty is nothing but a declaration of total independence on the part of 
Anacreon and a recognition of that status by the Empire?" 

"It seems so." 

"And do you suppose that Anacreon doesn't realize that, and is not anxious to emphasize the 
position of independence - so that it would naturally tend to resent any appearance of threats 
from the Empire? Particularly when it is evident that the Empire is powerless to fulfill any such 
threats, or it would never have allowed independence." 

"But then," interposed Sutt, "how would Mayor Hardin account for Lord Dorwin's assurances of 
Empire support? They seemed He shrugged. "Well, they seemed satisfactory." 

Hardin threw himself back in the chair. "You know, that's the most interesting part of the whole 
business. I'll admit I had thought his Lordship a most consummate donkey when I first met him 
- but it turned out that he was actually an accomplished diplomat and a most clever man. I took 
the liberty of recording all his statements." 

There was a flurry, and Pirenne opened his mouth in horror. 

"What of it?" demanded Hardin. "I realize it was a gross breach of hospitality and a thing no 
so-called gentleman would do. Also, that if his lordship had caught on, things might have been 
unpleasant; but he didn't, and I have the record, and that's that. I took that record, had it copied 
out and sent that to Hoik for analysis, also." 

Lundin Crast said, "And where is the analysis?" 

"That," replied Hardin, "is the interesting thing. The analysis was the most difficult of the three 
by all odds. When Hoik, after two days of steady work, succeeded in eliminating meaningless 
statements, vague gibberish, useless qualifications - in short, all the goo and dribble - he 
found he had nothing left. Everything canceled out." 

"Lord Dorwin, gentlemen, in five days of discussion didn't say one damned thing, and said it so 
you never noticed. There are the assurances you had from your precious Empire." 

Hardin might have placed an actively working stench bomb on the table and created no more 
confusion than existed after his last statement. He waited, with weary patience, for it to die 
down. 

"So," he concluded, "when you sent threats - and that's what they were - concerning Empire 
action to Anacreon, you merely irritated a monarch who knew better. Naturally, his ego would 
demand immediate action, and the ultimatum is the result-which brings me to my original 
statement. We have one week left and what do we do now?" 

"It seems," said Sutt, "that we have no choice but to allow Anacreon to establish military bases 



on Terminus. 


"I agree with you there," replied Hardin, "but what do we do toward kicking them off again at the 
first opportunity?" 

Yate Fulham's mustache twitched. "That sounds as if you have made up your mind that 
violence must be used against them." 

"Violence," came the retort, "is the last refuge of the incompetent. But I certainly don't intend to 
lay down the welcome mat and brush off the best furniture for their use." 

"I still don't like the way you put that," insisted Fulham. "It is a dangerous attitude; the more 
dangerous because we have noticed lately that a sizable section of the populace seems to 
respond to all your suggestions just so. I might as well tell you, Mayor Hardin, that the board is 
not quite blind to your recent activities." 

He paused and there was general agreement. Hardin shrugged. 

Fulham went on: "If you were to inflame the City into an act of violence, you would achieve 
elaborate suicide - and we don't intend to allow that. Our policy has but one cardinal principle, 
and that is the Encyclopedia. Whatever we decide to do or not to do will be so decided because 
it will be the measure required to keep that Encyclopedia safe." 

"Then," said Hardin, "you come to the conclusion that we must continue our intensive campaign 
of doing nothing." 

Pirenne said bitterly: "You have yourself demonstrated that the Empire cannot help us; though 
how and why it can be so, I don't understand. If compromise is necessary-" 

Hardin had the nightmarelike sensation of running at top speed and getting nowhere. "There is 
no compromise! Don't you realize that this bosh about military bases is a particularly inferior 
grade of drivel? Haut Rodric told us what Anacreon was after - outright annexation and 
imposition of its own feudal system of landed estates and peasant-aristocracy economy upon 
us. What is left of our bluff of nuclear power may force them to move slowly, but they will move 
nonetheless." 

He had risen indignantly, and the rest rose with him except for Jord Fara. 

And then Jord Fara spoke. "Everyone will please sit down. We've gone quite far enough, I 
think. Come, there's no use looking so furious, Mayor Hardin; none of us have been committing 
treason." 

"You'll have to convince me of that!" 

Fara smiled gently. "You know you don't mean that. Let me speak!" 


His little shrewd eyes were half closed, and the perspiration gleamed on the smooth expanse of 
his chin. "There seems no point in concealing that the Board has come to the decision that the 
real solution to the Anacreonian problem lies in what is to be revealed to us when the Vault 



opens six days from now. 


"Is that your contribution to the matter?" 

"Yes." 

"We are to do nothing, is that fight, except to wait in quiet serenity and utter faith for the deus ex 
machina to pop out of the Vault?" 

"Stripped of your emotional phraseology, that's the idea." 

"Such unsubtle escapism! Really, Dr. Fara, such folly smacks of genius. A lesser mind would 
be incapable of it." 

Fara smiled indulgently. "Your taste in epigrams is amusing, Hardin, but out of place. As a 
matter of fact, I think you remember my line of argument concerning the Vault about three 
weeks ago." 

"Yes, I remember it. I don't deny that it was anything but a stupid idea from the standpoint of 
deductive logic alone. You said - stop me when I make a mistake - that Hari Seldon was the 
greatest psychologist in the System; that, hence, he could foresee the right and uncomfortable 
spot we're in now; that, hence, he established the Vault as a method of telling us the way out." 

"You've got the essence of the idea." 

"Would it surprise you to hear that I've given considerable thought to the matter these last 
weeks?" 

"Very flattering. With what result?" 

"With the result that pure deduction is found wanting. Again what is needed is a little sprinkling 
of common sense." 

"For instance?" 

"For instance, if he foresaw the Anacreonian mess, why not have placed us on some other 
planet nearer the Galactic centers? It's well known that Seldon maneuvered the Commissioners 
on Trantor into ordering the Foundation established on Terminus. But why should he have done 
so? Why put us out here at all if he could see in advance the break in communication lines, our 
isolation from the Galaxy, the threat of our neighbors - and our helplessness because of the 
lack of metals on Terminus? That above all! Or if he foresaw all this, why not have warned the 
original settlers in advance that they might have had time to prepare, rather than wait, as he is 
doing, until one foot is over the cliff, before doing so? 

"And don't forget this. Even though he could foresee the problem then, we can see it equally 
well now. Therefore, if he could foresee the solution then, we should be able to see it now. After 
all, Seldon was not a magician. There are no trick methods of escaping from a dilemma that he 
can see and we can't." 



But, Hardin," reminded Fara, "we can't! 


"But you haven't tried. You haven't tried once. First, you refused to admit that there was a 
menace at all! Then you reposed an absolutely blind faith in the Emperor! Now you've shifted it 
to Hari Seldon. Throughout you have invariably relied on authority or on the past - never on 
yourselves." 

His fists balled spasmodically. "It amounts to a diseased attitude - a conditioned reflex that 
shunts aside the independence of your minds whenever it is a question of opposing authority. 
There seems no doubt ever in your minds that the Emperor is more powerful than you are, or 
Hari Seldon wiser. And that's wrong, don't you see?" 

For some reason, no one cared to answer him. 

Hardin continued: "It isn't just you. It's the whole Galaxy. Pirenne heard Lord Dorwin's idea of 
scientific research. Lord Dorwin thought the way to be a good archaeologist was to read all the 
books on the subject - written by men who were dead for centuries. He thought that the way to 
solve archaeological puzzles was to weigh the opposing authorities. And Pirenne listened and 
made no objections. Don't you see that there's something wrong with that?"
