"To that end we have placed you on such a planet and at such a time that in fifty years you 
were maneuvered to the point where you no longer have freedom of action. From now on, and 
into the centuries, the path you must take is inevitable. You will be faced with a series of crises, 
as you are now faced with the first, and in each case your freedom of action will become 
similarly circumscribed so that you will be forced along one, and only one, path. 

"It is that path which our psychology has worked out - and for a reason. 

"For centuries Galactic civilization has stagnated and declined, though only a few ever realized 
that. But now, at last, the Periphery is breaking away and the political unity of the Empire is 
shattered. Somewhere in the fifty years just past is where the historians of the future will place 
an arbitrary line and say: 'This marks the Fall of the Galactic Empire.' 

"And they will be right, though scarcely any will recognize that Fall for additional centuries. 

"And after the Fall will come inevitable barbarism, a period which, our psychohistory tells us, 
should, under ordinary circumstances, last for thirty thousand years. We cannot stop the Fall. 
We do not wish to; for Imperial culture has lost whatever virility and worth it once had. But we 
can shorten the period of Barbarism that must follow - down to a single thousand of years. 



"The ins and outs of that shortening, we cannot tell you; just as we could not tell you the truth 
about the Foundation fifty years ago. Were you to discover those ins and outs, our plan might 
fail; as it would have, had you penetrated the fraud of the Encyclopedia earlier; for then, by 
knowledge, your freedom of action would be expanded and the number of additional variables 
introduced would become greater than our psychology could handle. 

"But you won't, for there are no psychologists on Terminus, and never were, but for Alurin - 
and he was one of us. 

"But this I can tell you: Terminus and its companion Foundation at the other end of the Galaxy 
are the seeds of the Renascence and the future founders of the Second Galactic Empire. And it 
is the present crisis that is starting Terminus off to that climax. 

"This, by the way, is a rather straightforward crisis, much simpler than many of those that are 
ahead. To reduce it to its fundamentals, it is this: You are a planet suddenly cut off from the 
still-civilized centers of the Galaxy, and threatened by your stronger neighbors. You are a small 
world of scientists surrounded by vast and rapidly expanding reaches of barbarism. You are an 
island of nuclear power in a growing ocean of more primitive energy; but are helpless despite 
that, because of your lack of metals. 

"You see, then, that you are faced by hard necessity, and that action is forced on you. The 
nature of that action - that is, the solution to your dilemma - is, of course, obvious!" 

The image of Hari Seldon reached into open air and the book once more appeared in his hand. 
Fie opened it and said: 

"But whatever devious course your future history may take, impress it always upon your 
descendants that the path has been marked out, and that at its end is new and greater Empire!" 

And as his eyes bent to his book, he flicked into nothingness, and the lights brightened once 
more. 

Hardin looked up to see Pirenne facing him, eyes tragic and lips trembling. 

The chairman's voice was firm but toneless. "You were right, it seems. If you will see us tonight 
at six, the Board will consult with you as to the next move." 

They shook his hand, each one, and left, and Hardin smiled to himself. They were 
fundamentally sound at that; for they were scientists enough to admit that they were wrong - 
but for them, it was too late. 

Fie looked at his watch. By this time, it was all over. Lee's men were in control and the Board 
was giving orders no longer. 

The Anacreonians were landing their first spaceships tomorrow, but that was all right, too. In six 
months, they would be giving orders no longer. 

In fact, as Hari Seldon had said, and as Salvor Hardin had guessed since the day that Anselm 
haut Rodric had first revealed to him Anacreon's lack of nuclear power - the solution to this first 
crisis was obvious. 



Obvious as all hell! 

PART III 

THE MAYORS 

i. 

THE FOUR KINGDOMS - The name given to those portions of the Province of Anacreon which 
broke away from the First Empire in the early years of the Foundational Era to form 
independent and short-lived kingdoms. The largest and most powerful of these was Anacreon 
itself which in area... 

... Undoubtedly the most interesting aspect of the history of the Four Kingdoms involves the 
strange society forced temporarily upon it during the administration of Salvor Hardin.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

A deputation! 

That Salvor Hardin had seen it coming made it none the more pleasant. On the contrary, he 
found anticipation distinctly annoying. 

Yohan Lee advocated extreme measures. "I don't see, Hardin," he said, "that we need waste 
any time. They can't do anything till next election - legally, anyway - and that gives us a year. 
Give them the brush-off." 

Hardin pursed his lips. "Lee, you'll never learn. In the forty years I've known you, you've never 
once learned the gentle art of sneaking up from behind." 

"It's not my way of fighting," grumbled Lee. 

"Yes, I know that. I suppose that's why you're the one man I trust." He paused and reached for 
a cigar. "We've come a long way, Lee, since we engineered our coup against the 
Encyclopedists way back. I'm getting old. Sixty-two. Do you ever think how fast those thirty 
years went?" 

Lee snorted. "I don't feel old, and I'm sixty-six." 

"Yes, but I haven't your digestion." Hardin sucked lazily at his cigar. He had long since stopped 
wishing for the mild Vegan tobacco of his youth. Those days when the planet, Terminus, had 
trafficked with every part of the Galactic Empire belonged in the limbo to which all Good Old 
Days go. Toward the same limbo where the Galactic Empire was heading. He wondered who 
the new emperor was - or if there was a new emperor at all - or any Empire. Space! For thirty 
years now, since the breakup of communications here at the edge of the Galaxy, the whole 
universe of Terminus had consisted of itself and the four surrounding kingdoms. 




How the mighty had fallen! Kingdoms ! They were prefects in the old days, all part of the same 
province, which in turn had been part of a sector, which in turn had been part of a quadrant, 
which in turn had been part of the allembracing Galactic Empire. And now that the Empire had 
lost control over the farther reaches of the Galaxy, these little splinter groups of planets became 
kingdoms - with comic-opera kings and nobles, and petty, meaningless wars, and a life that 
went on pathetically among the ruins. 

A civilization falling. Nuclear power forgotten. Science fading to mythology - until the 
Foundation had stepped in. The Foundation that Hari Seldon had established for just that 
purpose here on Terminus. 

Lee was at the window and his voice broke in on Hardin's reverie. "They've come," he said, "in 
a late-model ground car, the young pups." He took a few uncertain steps toward the door and 
then looked at Hardin. 

Hardin smiled, and waved him back. "I've given orders to have them brought up here." 

"Here! What for? You're making them too important." 

"Why go through all the ceremonies of an official mayor's audience? I'm getting too old for red 
tape. Besides which, flattery is useful when dealing with youngsters - particularly when it 
doesn't commit you to anything." He winked. "Sit down, Lee, and give me your moral backing. 

I'll need it with this young Sermak." 

"That fellow, Sermak," said Lee, heavily, "is dangerous. He's got a following, Hardin, so don't 
underestimate him." 

"Have I ever underestimated anybody?" 

"Well, then, arrest him. You can accuse him of something or other afterward." 

Hardin ignored that last bit of advice. "There they are, Lee." In response to the signal, he 
stepped on the pedal beneath his desk, and the door slid aside. 

They filed in, the four that composed the deputation, and Hardin waved them gently to the 
armchairs that faced his desk in a semicircle. They bowed and waited for the mayor to speak 
first. 

Hardin flicked open the curiously carved silver lid of the cigar box that had once belonged to 
Jord Fara of the old Board of Trustees in the long-dead days of the Encyclopedists. It was a 
genuine Empire product from Santanni, though the cigars it now contained were home-grown. 
One by one, with grave solemnity, the four of the deputation accepted cigars and lit up in 
ritualistic fashion.
