"Interesting!" The mayor placed his arms around his neck and said suddenly, "Start talking 
about the situation at Anacreon!" 

The ambassador frowned and withdrew the cigar from his mouth. He looked at it distastefully 
and put it down. "Well, it's pretty bad." 

"You wouldn't be here, otherwise." 

"Scarcely. Here's the position. The key man at Anacreon is the Prince Regent, Wienis. He's 
King Lepold's uncle." 

"I know. But Lepold is coming of age next year, isn't he? I believe he'll be sixteen in February." 

"Yes." Pause, and then a wry addition. "If he lives. The king's father died under suspicious 
circumstances. A needle bullet through the chest during a hunt. It was called an accident." 


"Hmph. I seem to remember Wienis the time I was on Anacreon, when we kicked them off 
Terminus. It was before your time. Let's see now. If I remember, he was a dark young fellow, 
black hair and a squint in his right eye. He had a funny hook in his nose." 

"Same fellow. The hook and the squint are still there, but his hair's gray now. He plays the 
game dirty. Luckily, he's the most egregious fool on the planet. Fancies himself as a shrewd 
devil, too, which mades his folly the more transparent." 

"That's usually the way." 

"His notion of cracking an egg is to shoot a nuclear blast at it. Witness the tax on Temple 
property he tried to impose just after the old king died two years ago. Remember?" 

Hardin nodded thoughtfully, then smiled. "The priests raised a howl." 

"They raised one you could hear way out to Lucreza. He's shown more caution in dealing with 
the priesthood since, but he still manages to do things the hard way. In a way, it's unfortunate 
for us; he has unlimited self-confidence." 

"Probably an over-compensated inferiority complex. Younger sons of royalty get that way, you 
know." 


But it amounts to the same thing. He's foaming at the mouth with eagerness to attack the 



Foundation. He scarcely troubles to conceal it. And he's in a position to do it, too, from the 
standpoint of armament. The old king built up a magnificent navy, and Wienis hasn't been 
sleeping the last two years. In fact, the tax on Temple property was originally intended for 
further armament, and when that fell through he increased the income tax twice." 

"Any grumbling at that?" 

"None of serious importance. Obedience to appointed authority was the text of every sermon in 
the kingdom for weeks. Not that Wienis showed any gratitude." 

"All right. I've got the background. Now what's happened?" 

"Two weeks ago an Anacreonian merchant ship came across a derelict battle cruiser of the old 
Imperial Navy. It must have been drifting in space for at least three centuries." 

Interest flickered in Hardin's eyes. He sat up. "Yes, I've heard of that. The Board of Navigation 
has sent me a petition asking me to obtain the ship for purposes of study. It is in good 
condition, I understand." 

"In entirely too good condition," responded Verisof, dryly. "When Wienis received your 
suggestion last week that he turn the ship over to the Foundation, he almost had convulsions." 

"He hasn't answered yet." 

"He won't - except with guns, or so he thinks. You see, he came to me on the day I left 
Anacreon and requested that the Foundation put this battle cruiser into fighting order and turn it 
over to the Anacreonian navy. He had the infernal gall to say that your note of last week 
indicated a plan of the Foundation's to attack Anacreon. He said that refusal to repair the battle 
cruiser would confirm his suspicions; and indicated that measures for the self-defense of 
Anacreon would be forced upon him. Those are his words. Forced upon him! And that's why I'm 
here." 

Hardin laughed gently. 

Verisof smiled and continued, "Of course, he expects a refusal, and it would be a perfect 
excuse - in his eyes - for immediate attack." 

"I see that, Verisof. Well, we have at least six months to spare, so have the ship fixed up and 
present it with my compliments. Have it renamed the Wienis as a mark of our esteem and 
affection." 

He laughed again. 

And again Verisof responded with the faintest trace of a smile, "I suppose it's the logical step, 
Hardin - but I'm worried." 

"What about?" 

"It's a ship! They could build in those days. Its cubic capacity is half again that of the entire 
Anacreonian navy. It's got nuclear blasts capable of blowing up a planet, and a shield that could 
take a Q-beam without working up radiation. Too much of a good thing, Hardin 



"Superficial, Verisof, superficial. You and I both know that the armament he now has could 
defeat Terminus handily, long before we could repair the cruiser for our own use. What does it 
matter, then, if we give him the cruiser as well? You know it won't ever come to actual war." 

"I suppose so. Yes." The ambassador looked up. "But Hardin 

"Well? Why do you stop? Go ahead." 

"Look. This isn't my province. But I've been reading the paper." He placed the Journal on the 
desk and indicated the front page. "What's this all about?" 

Hardin dropped a casual glance. "'A group of Councilmen are forming a new political party.'" 

"That's what it says." Verisof fidgeted. "I know you're in better touch with internal matters than I 
am, but they're attacking you with everything short of physical violence. How strong are they?" 

"Damned strong. They'll probably control the Council after next election." 

"Not before?" Verisof looked at the mayor obliquely. "There are ways of gaining control besides 
elections." 

"Do you take me for Wienis?" 

"No. But repairing the ship will take months and an attack after that is certain. Our yielding will 
be taken as a sign of appalling weakness and the addition of the Imperial Cruiser will just about 
double the strength of Wienis' navy. He'll attack as sure as I'm a high priest. Why take 
chances? Do one of two things. Either reveal the plan of campaign to the Council, or force the 
issue with Anacreon now!" 

Hardin frowned. "Force the issue now? Before the crisis comes? It's the one thing I mustn't do. 
There's Hari Seldon and the Plan, you know." 

Verisof hesitated, then muttered, "You're absolutely sure, then, that there is a Plan?" 

"There can scarcely be any doubt," came the stiff reply. "I was present at the opening of the 
Time Vault and Seldon's recording revealed it then." 

"I didn't mean that, Hardin. I just don't see how it could be possible to chart history for a 
thousand years ahead. Maybe Seldon overestimated himself." He shriveled a bit at Hardin's 
ironical smile, and added, "Well, I'm no psychologist," 

"Exactly. None of us are. But I did receive some elementary training in my youth - enough to 
know what psychology is capable of, even if I can't exploit its capabilities myself. There's no 
doubt but that Seldon did exactly what he claims to have done. The Foundation, as he says, 
was established as a scientific refuge - the means by which the science and culture of the 
dying Empire was to be preserved through the centuries of barbarism that have begun, to be 
rekindled in the end into a second Empire." 

Verisof nodded, a trifle doubtfully. "Everyone knows that's the way things are supposed to go. 



But can we afford to take chances? Can we risk the present for the sake of a nebulous future?" 

"We must - because the future isn't nebulous. It's been calculated out by Seldon and charted. 
Each successive crisis in our history is mapped and each depends in a measure on the 
successful conclusion of the ones previous. This is only the second crisis and Space knows 
what effect even a trifling deviation would have in the end." 

"That's rather empty speculation." 

"No! Hari Seldon said in the Time Vault, that at each crisis our freedom of action would become 
circumscribed to the point where only one course of action was possible." 

"So as to keep us on the straight and narrow?" 

"So as to keep us from deviating, yes. But, conversely, as long as more than one course of 
action is possible, the crisis has not been reached. We must let things drift so long as we 
possibly can, and by space, that's what I intend doing." 

Verisof didn't answer. He chewed his lower lip in a grudging silence. It had only been the year 
before that Hardin had first discussed the problem with him - the real problem; the problem of 
countering Anacreon's hostile preparations. And then only because he, Verisof, had balked at 
further appeasement. 

Hardin seemed to follow his ambassador's thoughts. "I would much rather never to have told 
you anything about this." 

"What makes you say that?" cried Verisof, in surprise. 

"Because there are six people now - you and I, the other three ambassadors and Yohan Lee - 
who have a fair notion of what's ahead; and I'm damned afraid that it was Seldon's idea to have 
no one know."
