Five of the Commission of Public Safety sat behind the raised desk. They wore scarlet and gold 
uniforms and the shining, close-fitting plastic caps that were the sign of their judicial function. In 
the center was the Chief Commissioner Linge Chen. Gaal had never before seen so great a 
Lord and he watched him with fascination. Chen, throughout the trial, rarely said a word. He 
made it quite clear that much speech was beneath his dignity. 

The Commission's Advocate consulted his notes and the examination continued, with Seldon 
still on the stand: 

Q. Let us see, Dr. Seldon. How many men are now engaged in the project of which you are 
head? 

A. Fifty mathematicians. 

Q. Including Dr. Gaal Dornick? 

A. Dr. Dornick is the fifty-first, 

Q. Oh, we have fifty-one then? Search your memory, Dr. Seldon. Perhaps there are fifty-two or 
fifty-three? Or perhaps even more? 



A. Dr. Dornick has not yet formally joined my organization. When he does, the membership will 
be fifty-one. It is now fifty, as I have said. 

Q. Not perhaps nearly a hundred thousand? 

A. Mathematicians? No. 

Q. I did not say mathematicians. Are there a hundred thousand in all capacities? 

A. In all capacities, your figure may be correct. 

Q. May be? I say it is. I say that the men in your project number ninety-eight thousand, five 
hundred and seventy-two. 

A. I believe you are counting women and children. 

Q. (raising his voice) Ninety eight thousand five hundred and seventy-two individuals is the 
intent of my statement. There is no need to quibble. 

A. I accept the figures. 

Q. (referring to his notes) Let us drop that for the moment, then, and take up another matter 
which we have already discussed at some length. Would you repeat, Dr. Seldon, your thoughts 
concerning the future of Trantor? 

A. I have said, and I say again, that Trantor will lie in ruins within the next three centuries. 

Q. You do not consider your statement a disloyal one? 

A. No, sir. Scientific truth is beyond loyalty and disloyalty. 

Q. You are sure that your statement represents scientific truth? 

A. I am. 

Q. On what basis? 

A. On the basis of the mathematics of psychohistory. 

Q. Can you prove that this mathematics is valid'? 

A. Only to another mathematician. 

Q. (with a smile) Your claim then is that your truth is of so esoteric a nature that it is beyond the 
understanding of a plain man. It seems to me that truth should be clearer than that, less 
mysterious, more open to the mind. 

A. It presents no difficulties to some minds. The physics of energy transfer, which we know as 
thermodynamics, has been clear and true through all the history of man since the mythical 
ages, yet there may be people present who would find it impossible to design a power engine. 
People of high intelligence, too. I doubt if the learned Commissioners- 

At this point, one of the Commissioners leaned toward the Advocate. His words were not heard 



but the hissing of the voice carried a certain asperity. The Advocate flushed and interrupted 
Seldon. 

Q. We are not here to listen to speeches, Dr. Seldon. Let us assume that you have made your 
point. Let me suggest to you that your predictions of disaster might be intended to destroy 
public confidence in the Imperial Government for purposes of your own. 

A. That is not so. 

Q. Let me suggest that you intend to claim that a period of time preceding the so-called ruin of 
Trantor will be filled with unrest of various types. 

A. That is correct. 

Q. And that by the mere prediction thereof, you hope to bring it about, and to have then an 
army of a hundred thousand available. 

A. In the first place, that is not so. And if it were, investigation will show you that barely ten 
thousand are men of military age, and none of these has training in arms. 

Q. Are you acting as an agent for another? 

A. I am not in the pay of any man, Mr. Advocate. 

Q. You are entirely disinterested? You are serving science? 

A. I am. 

Q. Then let us see how. Can the future be changed, Dr. Seldon? 

A. Obviously. This courtroom may explode in the next few hours, or it may not. If it did, the 
future would undoubtedly be changed in some minor respects. 

Q. You quibble, Dr. Seldon. Can the overall history of the human race be changed? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Easily? 

A. No. With great difficulty. 

Q. Why? 

A. The psychohistoric trend of a planet-full of people contains a huge inertia. To be changed it 
must be met with something possessing a similar inertia. Either as many people must be 
concerned, or if the number of people be relatively small, enormous time for change must be 
allowed. Do you understand? 

Q. I think I do. Trantor need not be ruined, if a great many people decide to act so that it will 
not. 


A. That is right. 



Q. As many as a hundred thousand people? 

A. No, sir. That is far too few. 

Q. You are sure? 

A. Consider that Trantor has a population of over forty billions. Consider further that the trend 
leading to ruin does not belong to Trantor alone but to the Empire as a whole and the Empire 
contains nearly a quintillion human beings. 

Q. I see. Then perhaps a hundred thousand people can change the trend, if they and their 
descendants labor for three hundred years. 

A. I'm afraid not. Three hundred years is too short a time. 

Q. Ah! In that case, Dr. Seldon, we are left with this deduction to be made from your 
statements. You have gathered one hundred thousand people within the confines of your 
project. These are insufficient to change the history of Trantor within three hundred years. In 
other words, they cannot prevent the destruction of Trantor no matter what they do. 

A. You are unfortunately correct. 

Q. And on the other hand, your hundred thousand are intended for no illegal purpose. 

A. Exactly. 

Q. (slowly and with satisfaction) In that case, Dr. Seldon- Now attend, sir, most carefully, for we 
want a considered answer. What is the purpose of your hundred thousand? 

The Advocate's voice had grown strident. He had sprung his trap; backed Seldon into a comer; 
driven him astutely from any possibility of answering. 

There was a rising buzz of conversation at that which swept the ranks of the peers in the 
audience and invaded even the row of Commissioners. They swayed toward one another in 
their scarlet and gold, only the Chief remaining uncorrupted. 

Hari Seldon remained unmoved. He waited for the babble to evaporate. 

A. To minimize the effects of that destruction. 

Q. And exactly what do you mean by that? 

A. The explanation is simple. The coming destruction of Trantor is not an event in itself, isolated 
in the scheme of human development. It will be the climax to an intricate drama which was 
begun centuries ago and which is accelerating in pace continuously. I refer, gentlemen, to the 
developing decline and fall of the Galactic Empire. 

The buzz now became a dull roar. The Advocate, unheeded, was yelling, "You are openly 
declaring that-" and stopped because the cries of "Treason" from the audience showed that the 
point had been made without any hammering. 

Slowly, the Chief Commissioner raised his gavel once and let it drop. The sound was that of a 



mellow gong. When the reverberations ceased, the gabble of the audience also did. The 
Advocate took a deep breath. 

Q. (theatrically) Do you realize, Dr. Seldon, that you are speaking of an Empire that has stood 
for twelve thousand years, through all the vicissitudes of the generations, and which has behind 
it the good wishes and love of a quadrillion human beings? 

A. I am aware both of the present status and the past history of the Empire. Without disrespect, 

I must claim a far better knowledge of it than any in this room. 

Q. And you predict its ruin? 

A. It is a prediction which is made by mathematics. I pass no moral judgements. Personally, I 
regret the prospect. Even if the Empire were admitted to be a bad thing (an admission I do not 
make), the state of anarchy which would follow its fall would be worse. It is that state of anarchy 
which my project is pledged to fight. The fall of Empire, gentlemen, is a massive thing, 
however, and not easily fought. It is dictated by a rising bureaucracy, a receding initiative, a 
freezing of caste, a damming of curiosity - a hundred other factors. It has been going on, as I 
have said, for centuries, and it is too majestic and massive a movement to stop. 

Q. Is it not obvious to anyone that the Empire is as strong as it ever was? 

A. The appearance of strength is all about you. It would seem to last forever. However, Mr. 
Advocate, the rotten tree-trunk, until the very moment when the storm-blast breaks it in two, 
has all the appearance of might it ever had. The storm-blast whistles through the branches of 
the Empire even now. Listen with the ears of psychohistory, and you will hear the creaking.
