PART IV 

THE TRADERS 

i. 

TRADERS-... and constantly in advance of the political hegemony of the Foundation were the 
Traders, reaching out tenuous fingerholds through the tremendous distances of the Periphery. 
Months or years might pass between landings on Terminus; their ships were often nothing 
more than patchquilts of home-made repairs and improvisations; their honesty was none of the 
highest; their daring... 

Through it all they forged an empire more enduring than the pseudo-religious despotism of the 
Four Kingdoms... 


Tales without end are told of these massive, lonely figures who bore half-seriously, 
half-mockingly a motto adopted from one of Salvor Hardin's epigrams, "Never let your sense of 




morals prevent you from doing what is right!" It is difficult now to tell which tales are real and 
which apocryphal. There are none probably that have not suffered some exaggeration.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

Limmar Ponyets was completely a-lather when the call reached his receiver - which proves 
that the old bromide about telemessages and the shower holds true even in the dark, hard 
space of the Galactic Periphery. 

Luckily that part of a free-lance trade ship which is not given over to miscellaneous 
merchandise is extremely snug. So much so, that the shower, hot water included, is located in 
a two-by-four cubby, ten feet from the control panels. Ponyets heard the staccato rattle of the 
receiver quite plainly. 

Dripping suds and a growl, he stepped out to adjust the vocal, and three hours later a second 
trade ship was alongside, and a grinning youngster entered through the air tube between the 
ships. 

Ponyets rattled his best chair forward and perched himself on the pilot-swivel. 

"What've you been doing, Gorm?" he asked, darkly. "Chasing me all the way from the 
Foundation?" 

Les Gorm broke out a cigarette, and shook his head definitely, "Me? Not a chance. I'm just a 
sucker who happened to land on Glyptal IV the day after the mail. So they sent me out after 
you with this." 

The tiny, gleaming sphere changed hands, and Gorm added, "It's confidential. Super-secret. 
Can't be trusted to the sub-ether and all that. Or so I gather. At least, it's a Personal Capsule, 
and won't open for anyone but you." 

Ponyets regarded the capsule distastefully, "I can see that. And I never knew one of these to 
hold good news, either." 

It opened in his hand and the thin, transparent tape unrolled stiffly. His eyes swept the 
message quickly, for when the last of the tape had emerged, the first was already brown and 
crinkled. In a minute and a half it had turned black and, molecule by molecule, fallen apart. 

Ponyets grunted hollowly, "Oh, Galaxy f 

Les Gorm said quietly, "Can I help somehow? Or is it too secret?" 

"It will bear telling, since you're of the Guild. I've got to go to Askone." 

"That place? How come?" 

"They've imprisoned a trader. But keep it to yourself." 

Gorm's expression jolted into anger, "Imprisoned! That's against the Convention." 

"So is the interference with local politics." 



"Oh! Is that what he did?" Gorm meditated. "Who's the trader'? Anyone I know?" 

"No!" said Ponyets sharply, and Gorm accepted the implication and asked no further questions. 

Ponyets was up and staring darkly out the visiplate. He mumbled strong expressions at that 
part of the misty lens-form that was the body of the Galaxy, then said loudly, "Damnedest 
mess! I'm way behind quota." 

Light broke on Gorm's intellect, "Hey, friend, Askone is a closed area." 

"That's right. You can't sell as much as a penknife on Askone. They won't buy nuclear gadgets 
of any sort. With my quota dead on its feet, it's murder to go there." 

"Can't get out of it?" 

Ponyets shook his head absently, A know the fellow involved. Can't walk out on a friend. What 
of it? I am in the hands of the Galactic Spirit and walk cheerfully in the way he points out." 

Gorm said blankly, "Huh?" 

Ponyets looked at him, and laughed shortly, "I forgot. You never read the 'Bood of the Spirit,' 
did you?" 

"Never heard of it," said Gorm, curtly. 

"Well, you would if you'd had a religious training." 

"Religious training? For the priesthood?" Gorm was profoundly shocked. 

"Afraid so. It's my dark shame and secret. I was too much for the Reverend Fathers, though, 
They expelled me, for reasons sufficient to promote me to a secular education under the 
Foundation. Well, look, I'd better push off. How's your quota this year?" 

Gorm crushed out his cigarette and adjusted his cap, "I've got my last cargo going now. I'll 
make it." 

"Lucky fellow," gloomed Ponyets, and for many minutes after Les Gorm left, he sat in 
motionless reverie. 

So Eskel Gorov was on Askone - and in prison as well! 

That was bad! In fact, considerably worse than it might appear. It was one thing to tell a curious 
youngster a diluted version of the business to throw him off and send him about his own. It was 
a thing of a different sort to face the truth. 

For Limmar Ponyets was one of the few people who happened to know that Master Trader 
Eskel Gorov was not a trader at all; but that entirely different thing, an agent of the Foundation! 


2 . 

Two weeks gone! Two weeks wasted. 



One week to reach Askone, at the extreme borders of which the vigilant warships speared out 
to meet him in converging numbers. Whatever their detection system was, it worked - and well. 


They sidled him in slowly, without a signal, maintaining their cold distance, and pointing him 
harshly towards the central sun of Askone. 

Ponyets could have handled them at a pinch. Those ships were holdovers from the 
dead-and-gone Galactic Empire - but they were sports cruisers, not warships; and without 
nuclear weapons, they were so many picturesque and impotent ellipsoids. But Eskel Gorov was 
a prisoner in their hands, and Gorov was not a hostage to lose. The Askonians must know that. 

And then another week - a week to wind a weary way through the clouds of minor officials that 
formed the buffer between the Grand Master and the outer world. Each little sub-secretary 
required soothing and conciliation. Each required careful and nauseating milking for the 
flourishing signature that was the pathway to the next official one higher up. 

For the first time, Ponyets found his trader's identification papers useless. 

I Now, at last, the Grand Master was on the other side of the Guard-flanked gilded door - and 
two weeks had gone. 

Gorov was still a prisoner and Ponyets' cargo rotted useless in the holds of his ship. 

The Grand Master was a small man; a small man with a balding head and very wrinkled face, 
whose body seemed weighed down to motionlessness by the huge, glossy fur collar about his 
neck. 

His fingers moved on either side, and the line of armed men backed away to for a passage, 
along which Ponyets strode to the foot of the Chair of State. 

"Don't speak," snapped the Grand Master, and Ponyets' opening lips closed tightly. 

"That's right," the Askonian ruler relaxed visibly, "I can't endure useless chatter. You cannot 
threaten and I won't abide flattery. Nor is there room for injured complaints. I have lost count of 
the times you wanderers have been warned that your devil's machines are not wanted 
anywhere in Askone." 

"Sir," said Ponyets, quietly, "there is no attempt to justify the trader in question. It is not the 
policy of traders to intrude where they are not wanted. But the Galaxy is great, and it has 
happened before that a boundary has been trespassed unwittingly. It was a deplorable 
mistake." 

"Deplorable, certainly," squeaked the Grand Master. "But mistake? Your people on Glyptal IV 
have been bombarding me with pleas for negotiation since two hours after the sacrilegious 
wretch was seized. I have been warned by them of your own coming many times over. It seems 
a well-organized rescue campaign. Much seems to have been anticipated - a little too much for 



mistakes, deplorable or otherwise." 

The Askonian's black eyes were scornful. He raced on, "And are you traders, flitting from world 
to world like mad little butterflies, so mad in your own right that you can land on Askone's 
largest world, in the center of its system, and consider it an unwitting boundary mixup? Come, 
surely not." 

Ponyets winced without showing it. He said, doggedly, "If the attempt to trade was deliberate, 
your Veneration, it was most injudicious and contrary to the strictest regulations of our Guild." 

"Injudicious, yes," said the Askonian, curtly. "So much so, that your comrade is likely to lose life 
in payment." 

Ponyets' stomach knotted. There was no irresolution there. He said, "Death, your Veneration, is 
so absolute and irrevocable a phenomenon that certainly there must be some alternative." 

There was a pause before the guarded answer came, "I have heard that the Foundation is 
rich." 

"Rich? Certainly. But our riches are that which you refuse to take. Our nuclear goods are 
worth-"
