"I gave it to you months ago. You were satisfied then." 

Yes," Sutt rubbed his forehead thoughtfully with one finger, "but since then your activities have 
been significant. We know a good deal of what you're doing, Mallow. We know, exactly, how 
many factories you're putting up; in what a hurry you're doing it; and how much it's costing you. 
And there's this palace you have," he gazed about him with a cold lack of appreciation, "which 
set you back considerably more than my annual salary; and a swathe you've been cutting - a 
very considerable and expensive swathe - through the upper layers of Foundation society." 

"So? Beyond proving that you employ capable spies, what does it show?" 

"It shows you have money you didn't have a year ago. And that can show anything - for 
instance, that a good deal went on at Korell that we know nothing of. Where are you getting 
your money?" 

"My dear Sutt, you can't really expect me to tell you." 

"I don't." 

"I didn't think you did. That's why I'm going to tell you. It's straight from the treasure-chests of 
the Commdor of Korell." 

Sutt blinked. 

Mallow smiled and continued. "Unfortunately for you, the money is quite legitimate. I'm a Master 
Trader and the money I received was a quantity of wrought iron and chromite in exchange for a 
number of trinkets I was able to supply him with. Fifty per cent of the profit is mine by 
hidebound contract with the Foundation. The other half goes to the government at the end of 
the year when all good citizens pay their income tax." 

"There was no mention of any trade agreement in your report." 

"Nor was there any mention of what I had for breakfast that day, or the name of my current 
mistress, or any other irrelevant detail." Mallow's smile was fading into a sneer. "I was sent - to 
quote yourself - to keep my eyes open. They were never, shut. You wanted to find out what 
happened to the captured Foundation merchant ships. I never saw or heard of them. You 
wanted to find out if Korell had nuclear power. My report tells of nuclear blasters in the 
possession of the Commdor's private bodyguard. I saw no other signs. And the blasters I did 
see are relics of the old Empire, and may be show-pieces that do not work, for all my 
knowledge. 



"So far, I followed orders, but beyond that I was, and. still am, a free agent. According to the 
laws of the Foundation, a Master Trader may open whatever new markets he can, and receive 
therefrom his due half of the profits. What are your objections? I don't see them." 

Sutt bent his eyes carefully towards the wall and spoke with a difficult lack of anger, "It is the 
general custom of all traders to advance the religion with their trade." 

"I adhere to law, and not to custom." 

"There are times when custom can be the higher law." 

"Then appeal to the courts." 

Sutt raised somber eyes which seemed to retreat into their sockets. "You're a Smyrnian after 
all. It seems naturalization and education can't wipe out the taint in the blood. Listen, and try to 
understand, just the same. 

"This goes beyond money, or markets. We have the science of the great Hari Seldon to prove 
that upon us depends the future empire of the Galaxy, and from the course that leads to that 
Imperium we cannot turn. The religion we have is our all-important instrument towards that end. 
With it we have brought the Four Kingdoms under our control, even at the moment when they 
would have crushed us. It is the most potent device known with which to control men and 
worlds. 

"The primary reason for the development of trade and traders was to introduce and spread this 
religion more quickly, and to insure that the introduction of new techniques and a new economy 
would be subject to our thorough and intimate control." 

Fie paused for breath, and Mallow interjected quietly, "I know the theory. I understand it 
entirely." 

"Do you? It is more than I expected. Then you see, of course, that your attempt at trade for its 
own sake; at mass production of worthless gadgets, which can only affect a world's economy 
superficially; at the subversion of interstellar policy to the god of profits; at the divorce of 
nuclear power from our controlling religion - can only end with the overthrow and complete 
negation of the policy that has worked successfully for a century." 

"And time enough, too," said Mallow, indifferently, "for a policy outdated, dangerous and 
impossible. Flowever well your religion has succeeded in the Four Kingdoms, scarcely another 
world in the Periphery has accepted it. At the time we seized control of the Kingdoms, there 
were a sufficient number of exiles, Galaxy knows, to spread the story of how Salvor Hardin 
used the priesthood and the superstition of the people to overthrow the independence and 
power of the secular monarchs. And if that wasn't enough, the case of Askone two decades 
back made it plain enough. There isn't a ruler in the Periphery now that wouldn't sooner cut his 
own throat than let a priest of the Foundation enter the territory. 

"I don't propose to force Korell or any other world to accept something I know they don't want. 
No, Sutt. If nuclear power makes them dangerous, a sincere friendship through trade will be 
many times better than an insecure overlordship, based on the hated supremacy of a foreign 



spiritual power, which, once it weakens ever so slightly, can only fall entirely and leave nothing 
substantial behind except an immortal fear and hate." 

Suit said cynically, "Very nicely put. So, to get back to the original point of discussion, what are 
your terms? What do you require to exchange your ideas for mine?" 

"You think my convictions are for sale?" 

"Why not?" came the cold response. "Isn't that your business, buying and selling?" 

"Only at a profit," said Mallow, unoffended. "Can you offer me more than I'm getting as is?" 
"You could have three-quarters of your trade profits, rather than half." 

Mallow laughed shortly, "A fine offer. The whole of the trade on your terms would fall far below 
- a tenth share on mine. Try harder than that." 

"You could have a council seat." 

"I'll have that anyway, without and despite you." 

With a sudden movement, Sutt clenched his fist, "You could also save yourself a prison term. 
Of twenty years, if I have my way. Count the profit in that." 

"No profit at all, but can you fulfill such a threat?" 

"How about a trial for murder?" 

"Whose murder?" asked Mallow, contemptuously. 

Sutt's voice was harsh now, though no louder than before, "The murder of an Anacreonian 
priest, in the service of the Foundation." 

"Is that so now? And what's your evidence?" 

The secretary to the mayor leaned forward, "Mallow, I'm not bluffing. The preliminaries are 
over. I have only to sign one final paper and the case of the Foundation versus Hober Mallow, 
Master Trader, is begun. You abandoned a subject of the Foundation to torture and death at 
the hands of an alien mob, Mallow, and you have only five seconds to prevent the punishment 
due you. For myself, I'd rather you decided to bluff it out. You'd be safer as a destroyed enemy, 
than as a doubtfully-converted friend." 

Mallow said solemnly, "You have your wish." 

"Good!" and the secretary smiled savagely. "It was the mayor who wished the preliminary 
attempt at compromise, not I. Witness that I did not try too hard." 

The door opened before him, and he left. 

Mallow looked up as Ankor Jael re-entered the room. 

Mallow said, "Did you hear him?" 



The politician flopped to the floor. "I never heard him as angry as that, since I've known the 
snake." 

"All right. What do you make of it?" 

"Well, I'll tell you. A foreign policy of domination through spiritual means is his idee fixe, but it's 
my notion that his ultimate aims aren't spiritual. I was fired out of the Cabinet for arguing on the 
same issue, as I needn't tell you." 

"You needn't. And what are those unspiritual aims according to your notion?" 

Jael grew serious, "Well, he's not stupid, so he must see the bankruptcy of our religious policy, 
which has hardly made a single conquest for us in seventy years. He's obviously using it for 
purposes of his own. 

"Now any dogma primarily based on faith and emotionalism, is a dangerous weapon to use on 
others, since it is almost impossible to guarantee that the weapon will never be turned on the 
user. For a hundred years now, we've supported a ritual and mythology that is becoming more 
and more venerable, traditional - and immovable. In some ways, it isn't under our control any 
more." 

"In what ways?" demanded Mallow. "Don't stop. I want your thoughts."
