Sutt was at the window, his back to Mallow and Jael. It was early evening now, and the few 
stars that struggled feebly here at the very rim of the Galaxy sparked against the background of 
the misty, wispy Lens that included the remnants of that Empire, still vast, that fought against 
them. 


Sutt said, "No. You are not the man. 



You don't believe me? 


"I mean I don't trust you. You're smooth-tongued. You befooled me properly when I thought I 
had you under proper care on your first trip to Korell. When I thought I had you cornered at the 
trial, you wormed your way out of it and into the mayor's chair by demagoguery. There is 
nothing straight about you; no motive that hasn't another behind it; no statement that hasn't 
three meanings. 

"Suppose you were a traitor. Suppose your visit to the Empire had brought you a subsidy and a 
promise of power. Your actions would be precisely what they are now. You would bring about a 
war after having strengthened the enemy. You would force the Foundation into inactivity. And 
you would advance a plausible explanation of everything, one so plausible it would convince 
everyone." 

"You mean there'll be no compromise?" asked Mallow, gently. 

"I mean you must get out, by free will or force." 

"I warned you of the only alternative to co-operation." 

Jorane Sutt's face congested with blood in a sudden access of emotion. "And I warn you, 

Hober Mallow of Smyrno, that if you arrest me, there will be no quarter. My men will stop 
nowhere in spreading the truth about you, and the common people of the Foundation will unite 
against their foreign ruler. They have a consciousness of destiny that a Smyrnian can never 
understand - and that consciousness will destroy you." 

Flober Mallow said quietly to the two guards who had entered, "Take him away. Fle's under 
arrest." 

Sutt said, "Your last chance." 

Mallow stubbed out his cigar and never looked up. 

And five minutes later, Jael stirred and said, wearily, "Well, now that you've made a martyr for 
the cause, what next?" 

Mallow stopped playing with the ash tray and looked up, "That's not the Sutt I used to know. 
Fle's a blood-blind bull. Galaxy, he hates me." 

"All the more dangerous then." 

"More dangerous? Nonsense! Fle's lost all power of judgement." 

Jael said grimly, "You're overconfident, Mallow. You're ignoring the possibility of a popular 
rebellion." 

Mallow looked up, grim in his turn, "Once and for all, Jael, there is no possibility of a popular 
rebellion." 

"You're sure of yourself!" 

"I'm sure of the Seldon crisis and the historical validity of their solutions, externally and 



internally. There are some things I didn't tell Suit right now. He tried to control the Foundation 
itself by religious forces as he controlled the outer worlds, and he failed, -which is the surest 
sign that in the Seldon scheme, religion is played out. 

"Economic control worked differently. And to paraphrase that famous Salvor Hardin quotation of 
yours, it's a poor nuclear blaster that won't point both ways. If Korell prospered with our trade, 
so did we. If Korellian factories fail without our trade; and if the prosperity of the outer worlds 
vanishes with commercial isolation; so will our factories fail and our prosperity vanish. 

"And there isn't a factory, not a trading center, not a shipping line that isn't under my control; 
that I couldn't squeeze to nothing if Sutt attempts revolutionary propaganda. Where his 
propaganda succeeds, or even looks as though it might succeed, I will make certain that 
prosperity dies. Where it fails, prosperity will continue, because my factories will remain fully 
staffed. 

"So by the same reasoning which makes me sure that the Korellians will revolt in favor of 
prosperity, I am sure we will not revolt against it. The game will be played out to its end." 

"So then," said Jael, "you're establishing a plutocracy. You're making us a land of traders and 
merchant princes. Then what of the future?" 

Mallow lifted his gloomy face, and exclaimed fiercely, "What business of mine is the future? No 
doubt Seldon has foreseen it and prepared against it. There will be other crises in the time to 
come when money power has become as dead a force as religion is now. Let my successors 
solve those new problems, as I have solved the one of today." 

KORELL-.. .And so after three years of a war which was certainly the most unfought war on 
record, the Republic of Korell surrendered unconditionally, and Hober Mallow took his place 
next to Hari Seldon and Salvor Hardin in the hearts of the people of the Foundation. 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

Isaac Asimov was born in the Soviet Union to his great surprise. He moved quickly to correct 
the situation. When his parents emigrated to the United States, Isaac (three years old at the 
time) stowed away in their baggage. He has been an American citizen since the age of eight. 

Brought up in Brooklyn, and educated in its public schools, he eventually found his way to 
Columbia University and, over the protests of the school administration, managed to annex a 
series of degrees in chemistry, up to and including a Ph.D. He then infiltrated Boston University 
and climbed the academic ladder, ignoring all cries of outrage, until he found himself Professor 
of Biochemistry. 

Meanwhile, at the age of nine, he found the love of his life (in the inanimate sense) when he 
discovered his first science-fiction magazine. By the time he was eleven, he began to write 



stories, and at eighteen, he actually worked up the nerve to submit one. It was rejected. After 
four long months of tribulation and suffering, he sold his first story and, thereafter, he never 
looked back. 

In 1941 , when he was twenty-one years old, he wrote the classic short story "Nightfall" and his 
future was assured. Shortly before that he had begun writing his robot stories, and shortly after 
that he had begun his Foundation series. 


What was left except quantity? At the present time, he has published over 260 books, 
distributed through every major division of the Dewey system of library classification, and 
shows no signs of slowing up. He remains as youthful, as lively, and as lovable as ever, and 
grows more handsome with each year. You can be sure that this is so since he has written this 
little essay himself and his devotion to absolute objectivity is notorious. 

He is married to Janet Jeppson, psychiatrist and writer, has two children by a previous 
marriage, and lives in New York City. 




ASIMOV
