"Well, he goes off along a new twail completely. He twies to show that ahchaeological wemains 
on the thuhd planet of the Ahctuwian System show that humanity existed theah befoah theah 
wah any indications of space-twavel." 

"And that means it was humanity's birth planet?" 

"P'haps. I must wead it closely and weigh the evidence befoah I can say foah cuhtain. One 
must see just how weliable his obsuhvations ah." 

Hardin remained silent for a short while. Then he said, "When did Lameth write his book?" 

"Oh - I should say about eight hundwed yeahs ago. Of cohse, he has based it lahgely on the 
pwevious wuhk of Gleen." 

"Then why rely on him? Why not go to Arcturus and study the remains for yourself?" 

Lord Dorwin raised his eyebrows and took a pinch of snuff hurriedly. "Why, whatevah foah, my 
deah fellow?" 

"To get the information firsthand, of course." 

"But wheah's the necessity? It seems an uncommonly woundabout and hopelessly 
wigmawolish method of getting anywheahs. Look heah, now, I've got the wuhks of all the old 
mastahs - the gweat ahchaeologists of the past. I wigh them against each othah - balance the 
disagweements - analyze the conflicting statements - decide which is pwobably cowwect - 



and come to a conclusion. That is the scientific method. At least" - patronizingly -"as / see it. 
How insuffewably cwude it would be to go to Ahctuwus, oah to Sol, foah instance, and blundah 
about, when the old mastahs have covahed the gwound so much moah effectually than we 
could possibly hope to do." 

Hardin murmured politely, "I see." 

"Come, milord," said Pirenne, "think we had better be returning." 

"Ah, yes. P'haps we had." 

As they left the room, Hardin said suddenly, "Milord, may I ask a question?" 

Lord Dorwin smiled blandly and emphasized his answer with a gracious flutter of the hand. 
"Cuhtainly, my deah fellow. Only too happy to be of suhvice. If I can help you in any way fwom 
my pooah stoah of knowledge-" 

"It isn't exactly about archaeology, milord." 

"No?" 

"No. It's this: Last year we received news here in Terminus about the meltdown of a power 
plant on Planet V of Gamma Andromeda. We got the barest outline of the accident - no details 
at all. I wonder if you could tell me exactly what happened." 

Pirenne's mouth twisted. "I wonder you annoy his lordship with questions on totally irrelevant 
subjects." 

"Not at all, Doctah Piwenne," interceded the chancellor. "It is quite all wight. Theah isn't much to 
say concuhning it in any case. The powah plant did undergo meltdown and it was quite a 
catastwophe, y'know. I believe wadiatsen damage. Weally, the govuhnment is sewiously 
considewing placing seveah westwictions upon the indiscwiminate use of nucleah powah - 
though that is not a thing for genewal publication, y'know." 

"I understand," said Hardin. "But what was wrong with the plant?" 

"Well, weally," replied Lord Dorwin indifferently, "who knows? It had bwoken down some yeahs 
pweviously and it is thought that the weplacements and wepaiah wuhk wuh most infewiah. It is 
so difficult these days to find men who weally undahstand the moah technical details of ouah 
powah systems." And he took a sorrowful pinch of snuff. 

"You realize," said Hardin, "that the independent kingdoms of the Periphery had lost nuclear 
power altogether?" 

"Have they? I'm not at all suhpwised. Bahbawous planets- Oh, but my deah fellow, don't call 
them independent. They ahn't, y'know. The tweaties we've made with them ah pwoof positive of 
that. They acknowledge the soveweignty of the Empewah. They'd have to, of cohse, oah we 
wouldn't tweat with them." 


That may be so, but they have considerable freedom of action. 



"Yes, I suppose so. Considewable. But that scahcely mattahs. The Empiah is fah bettah off, 
with the Pewiphewy thwown upon its own wesoahces - as it is, moah oah less. They ahn't any 
good to us, y'know. Most bahbawous planets. Scahcely civilized." 

"They were civilized in the past. Anacreon was one of the richest of the outlying provinces. I 
understand it compared favorably with Vega itself." 

"Oh, but, Hahdin, that was centuwies ago. You can scahcely dwaw conclusion fwom that. 
Things wah diffewent in the old gweat days. We ahn't the men we used to be, y'know. But, 
Hahdin, come, you ah a most puhsistent chap. 

I've told you I simply won't discuss business today. Doctah Piwenne did pwepayah me foah 
you. He told me you would twy to badgah me, but I'm fah too old a hand foah that. Leave it foah 
next day. And that was that. 


5 . 

This was the second meeting of the Board that Hardin had attended, if one were to exclude the 
informal talks the Board members had had with the now-departed Lord Dorwin. Yet the mayor 
had a perfectly definite idea that at least one other, and possibly two or three, had been held, to 
which he had somehow never received an invitation. 

Nor, it seemed to him, would he have received notification of this one had it not been for the 
ultimatum. 

At least, it amounted to an ultimatum, though a superficial reading of the visigraphed document 
would lead one to suppose that it was a friendly interchange of greetings between two 
potentates. 

Hardin fingered it gingerly. It started off floridly with a salutation from "His Puissant Majesty, the 
King of Anacreon, to his friend and brother, Dr. Lewis Pirenne, Chairman of the Board of 
Trustees, of the Encyclopedia Foundation Number One," and it ended even more lavishly with 
a gigantic, multicolored seal of the most involved symbolism. 

But it was an ultimatum just the same. 

Hardin said: "It turned out that we didn't have much time after all - only three months. But little 
as it was, we threw it away unused. This thing here gives us a week. What do we do now?" 

Pirenne frowned worriedly. "There must be a loophole. It is absolutely unbelievable that they 
would push matters to extremities in the face of what Lord Dorwin has assured us regarding the 
attitude of the Emperor and the Empire." 

Hardin perked up. "I see. You have informed the King of Anacreon of this alleged attitude?" 

"I did - after having placed the proposal to the Board for a vote and having received unanimous 
consent." 


And when did this vote take place? 



Pirenne climbed onto his dignity. "I do not believe I am answerable to you in any way, Mayor 
Hardin." 


"All right. I'm not that vitally interested. It's just my opinion that it was your diplomatic 
transmission of Lord Dorwin's valuable contribution to the situation"- he lifted the comer of his 
mouth in a sour half-smile -"that was the direct cause of this friendly little note. They might 
have delayed longer otherwise - though I don't think the additional time would have helped 
Terminus any, considering the attitude of the Board." 

Said Yate Fulham: "And just how do you arrive at that remarkable conclusion, Mr. Mayor?" 

"In a rather simple way. It merely required the use of that much-neglected commodity - 
common sense. You see, there is a branch of human knowledge known as symbolic logic, 
which can be used to prune away all sorts of clogging deadwood that clutters up human 
language." 

"What about it?" said Fulham. 

"I applied it. Among other things, I applied it to this document here. I didn't really need to for 
myself because I knew what it was all about, but I think I can explain it more easily to five 
physical scientists by symbols rather than by words." 

Hardin removed a few sheets of paper from the pad under his arm and spread them out. "I 
didn't do this myself, by the way," he said. "Muller Hoik of the Division of Logic has his name 
signed to the analyses, as you can see." 

Pirenne leaned over the table to get a better view and Hardin continued: "The message from 
Anacreon was a simple problem, naturally, for the men who wrote it were men of action rather 
than men of words. It boils down easily and straightforwardly to the unqualified statement, when 
in symbols is what you see, and which in words, roughly translated, is, 'You give us what we 
want in a week, or we take it by force.'" 

There was silence as the five members of the Board ran down the line of symbols, and then 
Pirenne sat down and coughed uneasily. 

Hardin said, "No loophole, is there, Dr. Pirenne?" 

"Doesn't seem to be." 

"All right." Hardin replaced the sheets. "Before you now you see a copy of the treaty between 
the Empire and Anacreon - a treaty, incidentally, which is signed on the Emperor's behalf by 
the same Lord Dorwin who was here last week - and with it a symbolic analysis." 

The treaty ran through five pages of fine print and the analysis was scrawled out in just under 
half a page. 

"As you see, gentlemen, something like ninety percent of the treaty boiled right out of the 
analysis as being meaningless, and what we end up with can be described in the following 
interesting manner:
