"Well, suppose one man, one ambitious man, uses the force of religion against us, rather than 
for us." 

"You mean Sutt-" 

"You're right. I mean Sutt. Listen, man, if he could mobilize the various hierarchies on the 
subject planets against the Foundation in the name of orthodoxy, what chance would we 
stand? By planting himself at the head of the standards of the pious, he could make war on 
heresy, as represented by you, for instance, and make himself king eventually. After all, it was 
Hardin who said: 'A nuclear blaster is a good weapon, but it can point both ways.'" 

Mallow slapped his bare thigh, "All right, Jael, then get me in that council, and I'll fight him." 

Jael paused, then said significantly, "Maybe not. What was all that about having a priest 
lynched? Is isn't true, is it?" 

"It's true enough," Mallow said, carelessly. 

Jael whistled, "Has he definite proof?" 

"He should have." Mallow hesitated, then added, "Jaim Twer was his man from the beginning, 
though neither of them knew that I knew that. And Jaim Twer was an eyewitness." 

Jael shook his head. "Uh-uh. That's bad." 

"Bad? What's bad about it? That priest was illegally upon the planet by the Foundation's own 
laws. He was obviously used by the Korellian government as a bait, whether involuntary or not. 
By all the laws of common-sense, I had no choice but one action - and that action was strictly 



within the law. If he brings me to trial, he'll do nothing but make a prime fool of himself." 

And Jael shook his head again, "No, Mallow, you've missed it. I told you he played dirty. He's 
not out to convict you; he knows he can't do that. But he is out to ruin your standing with the 
people. You heard what he said. Custom is higher than law, at times. You could walk out of the 
trial scot-free, but if the people think you threw a priest to the dogs, your popularity is gone. 

"They'll admit you did the legal thing, even the sensible thing. But just the same you'll have 
been, in their eyes, a cowardly dog, an unfeeling brute, a hard-hearted monster. And you would 
never get elected to the council. You might even lose your rating as Master Trader by having 
your citizenship voted away from you. You're not native born, you know. What more do you 
think Sutt can want?" Mallow frowned stubbornly, "So!" "My boy," said Jael. "I'll stand by you, 
but / can't help. You're on the spot, -dead center." 


14 . 

The council chamber was full in a very literal sense on the fourth day of the trial of Hober 
Mallow, Master Trader. The only councilman absent was feebly cursing the fractured skull that 
had bedridden him. The galleries were filled to the aisleways and ceilings with those few of the 
crowd who by influence, wealth, or sheer diabolic perseverance had managed to get in. The 
rest filled the square outside, in swarming knots about the open-air trimensional 'visors. 

Ankor Jael made his way into the chamber with the near-futile aid and exertions of the police 
department, and then through the scarcely smaller confusion within to Hober Mallow's seat. 

Mallow turned with relief, "By Seldon, you cut it thin. Have you got it?" 

"Here, take it," said Jael. "It's everything you asked for." 

"Good. How are they taking it outside?" 

"They're wild clear through." Jael stirred uneasily, "You should never have allowed public 
hearings. You could have stopped them." 

"I didn't want to." 

"There's lynch talk. And Publis Manlio's men on the outer planets-" 

"I wanted to ask you about that, Jael. He's stirring up the Hierarchy against me, is he?" 

"Is he? It's the sweetest setup you ever saw, As Foreign Secretary, he handles the prosecution 
in a case of interstellar law. As High Priest and Primate of the Church, he rouses the fanatic 
hordes-" 

"Well, forget it. Do you remember that Hardin quotation you threw at me last month? We'll show 
them that the nuclear blaster can point both ways." 

The mayor was taking his seat now and the council members were rising in respect. 

Mallow whispered, "It's my turn today. Sit here and watch the fun." 



The day's proceedings began and fifteen minutes later, Hober Mallow stepped through a hostile 
whisper to the empty space before the mayor's bench. A lone beam of light centered upon him 
and in the public 'visors of the city, as well as on the myriads of private 'visors in almost every 
home of the Foundation's planets, the lonely giant figure of a man stared out defiantly. 

He began easily and quietly, "To save time, I will admit the truth of every point made against 
me by the prosecution. The story of the priest and the mob as related by them is perfectly 
accurate in every detail." 

There was a stirring in the chamber and a triumphant mass-snarl from the gallery. He waited 
patiently for silence. 

"However, the picture they presented fell short of completion. I ask the privilege of supplying 
the completion in my own fashion. My story may seem irrelevant at first. I ask your indulgence 
for that." 

Mallow made no reference to the notes before him. 

"I begin at the same time as the prosecution did; the day of my meeting with Jorane Sutt and 
Jaim Twer. What went on at those meetings you know. The conversations have been 
described, and to that description I have nothing to add - except my own thoughts of that day. 

"They were suspicious thoughts, for the events of that day were queer. Consider. Two people, 
neither of whom I knew more than casually, make unnatural and somewhat unbelievable 
propositions to me. One, the secretary to the mayor, asks me to play the part of intelligence 
agent to the government in a highly confidential matter, the nature and importance of which has 
already been explained to you. The other, self-styled leader of a political party, asks me to run 
for a council seat. 

"Naturally I looked for the ulterior motive. Sutt's seemed evident. He didn't trust me. Perhaps he 
thought I was selling nuclear power to enemies and plotting rebellion. And perhaps he was 
forcing the issue, or thought he was. In that case, he would need a man of his own near me on 
my proposed mission, as a spy. The last thought, however, did not occur to me until later on, 
when Jaim Twer came on the scene. 

"Consider again: Twer presents himself as a trader, retired into politics, yet I know of no details 
of his trading career, although my knowledge of the field is immense. And further, although 
Twer boasted of a lay education, he had never heard of a Seldon crisis." 

Hober Mallow waited to let the significance sink in and was rewarded with the first silence he 
had yet encountered, as the gallery caught its collective breath. That was for the inhabitants of 
Terminus itself. The men of the Outer Planets could hear only censored versions that would 
suit the requirements of religion. They would hear nothing of Seldon crises. But there would be 
further strokes they would not miss. 

Mallow continued: 

"Who here can honestly state that any man with a lay education can possibly be ignorant of the 
nature of a Seldon crisis? There is only one type of education upon the Foundation that 



excludes all mention of the planned history of Seldon and deals only with the man himself as a 
semi-mythical wizard- 

"I knew at that instant that Jaim Twer had never been a trader. I knew then that he was in holy 
orders and perhaps a full-fledged priest; and, doubtless, that for the three years he had 
pretended to head a political party of the traders, he had been a bought man of Jorane Sutt. 

"At the moment, I struck in the dark. I did not know Sun's purposes with regard to myself, but 
since he seemed to be feeding me rope liberally, I handed him a few fathoms of my own. My 
notion was that Twer was to be with me on my voyage as unofficial guardian on behalf of 
Jorane Sutt. Well, if he didn't get on, I knew well there'd be other devices waiting - and those 
others I might not catch in time. A known enemy is relatively safe. I invited Twer to come with 
me. He accepted. 

"That, gentlemen of the council, explains two things. First, it tells you that Twer is not a friend of 
mine testifying against me reluctantly and for conscience' sake, as the prosecution would have 
you believe. He is a spy, performing his paid job. Secondly, it explains a certain action of mine 
on the occasion of the first appearance of the priest whom I am accused of having murdered - 
an action as yet unmentioned, because unknown." 

Now there was a disturbed whispering in the council. Mallow cleared his throat theatrically, and 
continued:
