His voice took on a deeper tone, while the acolyte listened with veneration and the two soldiers 
with mounting fear. "And because this ship is upon such a devil's errand, the blessing of the 
Spirit is removed from it as well." 

He lifted his arms solemnly, and before a thousand televisors throughout the ship, soldiers 
cowered, as the stately image of their priest-attendant spoke: 



"In the name of the Galactic Spirit and of his prophet, Hari Seldon, and of his interpreters, the 
holy men of the Foundation, I curse this ship. Let the televisors of this ship, which are its eyes, 
become blind. Let its grapples, which are its arms, be paralyzed. Let the nuclear blasts, which 
are its fists, lose their function. Let the motors, which are its heart, cease to beat. Let the 
communications, which are its voice, become dumb. Let its ventilations, which are its breath, 
fade. Let its lights, which are its soul, shrivel into nothing. In the name of the Galactic Spirit, I so 
curse this ship." 

And with his last word, at the stroke of midnight, a hand, light-years distant in the Argolid 
Temple, opened an ultrawave relay, which at the instantaneous speed of the ultrawave, opened 
another on the flagship Wienis. 

And the ship died! 

For it is the chief characteristic of the religion of science that it works, and that such curses as 
that of Aporat's are really deadly. 

Aporat saw the darkness close down on the ship and heard the sudden ceasing of the soft, 
distant purring of the hyperatomic motors. Fie exulted and from the pocket of his long robe 
withdrew a self-powered nucleo-bulb that filled the room with pearly light. 

Fie looked down at the two soldiers who, brave men though they undoubtedly were, writhed on 
their knees in the last extremity of mortal terror. "Save our souls, your reverence. We are poor 
men, ignorant of the crimes of our leaders," one whimpered. 

"Follow," said Aporat, sternly. "Your soul is not yet lost." 

The ship was a turmoil of darkness in which fear was so thick and palpable, it was all but a 
miasmic smell. Soldiers crowded close wherever Aporat and his circle of light passed, striving 
to touch the hem of his robe, pleading for the tiniest scrap of mercy. 

And always his answer was, "Follow me!" 

Fie found Prince Lefkin, groping his way through the officers' quarters, cursing loudly for lights. 
The admiral stared at the priest-attendant with hating eyes. 

"There you are!" Lefkin inherited his blue eyes from his mother, but there was that about the 
hook in his nose and the squint in his eye that marked him as the son of Wienis. "What is the 
meaning of your treasonable actions? Return the power to the ship. I am commander here." 

"No longer," said Aporat, somberly. 

Lefkin looked about wildly. "Seize that man. Arrest him, or by Space, I will send every man 
within reach of my voice out the air lock in the nude." Fie paused, and then shrieked, "It is your 
admiral that orders. Arrest him." 

Then, as he lost his head entirely, "Are you allowing yourselves to be fooled by this 
mountebank, this harlequin? Do you cringe before a religion compounded of clouds and 
moonbeams? This man is an imposter and the Galactic Spirit he speaks of a fraud of the 
imagination devised to-" 



Aporat interrupted furiously. "Seize the blasphemer. You listen to him at the peril of your souls." 
And promptly, the noble admiral went down under the clutching hands of a score of soldiers. 
"Take him with you and follow me." 

Aporat turned, and with Lefkin dragged along after him, and the corridors behind black with 
soldiery, he returned to the communications room. There, he ordered the ex-commander before 
the one televisor that worked. 

"Order the rest of the fleet to cease course and to prepare for the return to Anacreon." 

The disheveled Lefkin, bleeding, beaten, and half stunned, did so. 

"And now," continued Aporat, grimly, "we are in contact with Anacreon on the hyperwave beam. 
Speak as I order you." 

Lefkin made a gesture of negation, and the mob in the room and the others crowding the 
corridor beyond, growled fearfully. 

"Speak!" said Aporat. "Begin: The Anacreonian navy-" 

Lefkin began. 


8 . 

There was absolute silence in Wienis' chambers when the image of Prince Lefkin appeared at 
the televisor. There had been one startled gasp from the regent at the haggard face and 
shredded uniform of his son, and then he collapsed into a chair, face contorted with surprise 
and apprehension. 

Hardin listened stolidly, hands clasped lightly in his lap, while the just-crowned King Lepold sat 
shriveled in the most shadowy comer, biting spasmodically at his goldbraided sleeve. Even the 
soldiers had lost the emotionless stare that is the prerogative of the military, and, from where 
they lined up against the door, nuclear blasts ready, peered furtively at the figure upon the 
televisor. 

Lefkin spoke, reluctantly, with a tired voice that paused at intervals as though he were being 
prompted-and not gently: 

"The Anacreonian navy ... aware of the nature of its mission ... and refusing to be a party ... to 
abominable sacrilage ... is returning to Anacreon ... with the following ultimatum issued ... to 
those blaspheming sinners ... who would dare to use profane force ... against the Foundation ... 
source of all blessings ... and against the Galactic Spirit. Cease at once all war against ... the 
true faith . . . and guarantee in a manner suiting us of the navy ... as represented by our ... 
priest-attendant, Theo Aporat ... that such war will never in the future ... be resumed, and that"- 
here a long pause, and then continuing -"and that the one-time prince regent, Wienis ... be 
imprisoned ... and tried before an ecclesiastical court ... for his crimes. Otherwise the royal navy 
... upon returning to Anacreon ... will blast the palace to the ground ... and take whatever other 



measures ... are 


necessary ... to destroy the nest of sinners ... and the den of destroyers ... of men's souls that 
now prevail." 

The voice ended with half a sob and the screen went blank. 

Hardin's fingers passed rapidly over the nucleo-bulb and its light faded until in the dimness, the 
hitherto regent, the king, and the soldiers were hazy-edged shadows; and for the first time it 
could be seen that an aura encompassed Hardin. 

It was not the blazing light that was the prerogative of kings, but one less spectacular, less 
impressive, and yet one more effective in its own way, and more useful. 

Hardin's voice was softly ironic as he addressed the same Wienis who had one hour earlier 
declared him a prisoner of war and Terminus on the point of destruction, and who now was a 
huddled shadow, broken and silent. 

"There is an old fable," said Hardin, "as old perhaps as humanity, for the oldest records 
containing it are merely copies of other records still older, that might interest you. It runs as 
follows: 

"A horse having a wolf as a powerful and dangerous enemy lived in constant fear of his life. 
Being driven to desperation, it occured to him to seek a strong ally. Whereupon he approached 
a man, and offered an alliance, pointing out that the wolf was likewise an enemy of the man. 
The man accepted the partnership at once and offered to kill the wolf immediately, if his new 
partner would only co-operate by placing his greater speed at the man's disposal. The horse 
was willing, and allowed the man to place bridle and saddle upon him. The man mounted, 
hunted down the wolf, and killed him. 

"The horse, joyful and relieved, thanked the man, and said: 'Now that our enemy is dead, 
remove your bridle and saddle and restore my freedom.' 

"Whereupon the man laughed loudly and replied, 'Never!' and applied the spurs with a will." 
Silence still. The shadow that was Wienis did not stir. 

Hardin continued quietly, "You see the analogy, I hope. In their anxiety to cement forever 
domination over their own people, the kings of the Four Kingdoms accepted the religion of 
science that made them divine; and that same religion of science was their bridle and saddle, 
for it placed the life blood of nuclear power in the hands of the priesthoodwho took their orders 
from us, be it noted, and not from you. You killed the wolf, but could not get rid of the m-" 

Wienis sprang to his feet and in the shadows, his eyes were maddened hollows. His voice was 
thick, incoherent. "And yet I'll get you. You won't escape. You'll rot. Let them blow us up. Let 
them blow everything up. You'll rot! I'll get you! 

"Soldiers!" he thundered, hysterically. "Shoot me down that devil. Blast him! Blast him!" 

Hardin turned about in his chair to face the soldiers and smiled. One aimed his nuclear blast 
and then lowered it. The others never budged. Salvor Hardin, mayor of Terminus, surrounded
