A figure detached itself from anonymity and stopped at the desk, as Gaal left. The man at the 
desk looked up and nodded briefly. The figure nodded in return and followed the young 
immigrant. 

He was in time to hear Gaal's destination. 

Gaal found himself hard against a railing. 

The small siqn said, "Supervisor." The man to whom the siqn referred did not look up. He said, 
"Where to?" 

Gaal wasn't sure, but even a few seconds hesitation meant men queuing in line behind him. 
The Supervisor looked up, "Where to?" 

Gaal's funds were low, but there was only this one night and then he would have a job. He tried 
to sound nonchalant, "A good hotel, please." 

The Supervisor was unimpressed, "They're all good. Name one." 

Gaal said, desperately, "The nearest one, please." 

The Supervisor touched a button. A thin line of light formed along the floor, twisting among 
others which brightened and dimmed in different colors and shades. A ticket was shoved into 
Gaal's hands. It glowed faintly. 

The Supervisor said, "One point twelve." 

Gaal fumbled for the coins. He said, "Where do I go?" 

"Follow the light. The ticket will keep glowing as long as you're pointed in the tight direction." 

Gaal looked up and began walking. There were hundreds creeping across the vast floor, 
following their individual trails, sifting and straining themselves through intersection points to 
arrive at their respective destinations. 



His own trail ended. A man in glaring blue and yellow uniform, shining and new in unstainable 
plasto-textile, reached for his two bags. 

"Direct line to the Luxor," he said. 

The man who followed Gaal heard that. He also heard Gaal say, "Fine," and watched him enter 
the blunt-nosed vehicle. 

The taxi lifted straight up. Gaal stared out the curved, transparent window, marvelling at the 
sensation of airflight within an enclosed structure and clutching instinctively at the back of the 
driver's seat. The vastness contracted and the people became ants in random distribution. The 
scene contracted further and began to slide backward. 

There was a wall ahead. It began high in the air and extended upward out of sight. It was 
riddled with holes that were the mouths of tunnels. Gaal's taxi moved toward one then plunged 
into it. For a moment, Gaal wondered idly how his driver could pick out one among so many. 

There was now only blackness, with nothing but the past-flashing of a colored signal light to 
relieve the gloom. The air was full of a rushing sound. 

Gaal leaned forward against deceleration then and the taxi popped out of the tunnel and 
descended to ground-level once more. 

"The Luxor Hotel," said the driver, unnecessarily. He helped Gaal with his baggage, accepted a 
tenth-credit tip with a businesslike air, picked up a waiting passenger, and was rising again. 

In all this, from the moment of debarkation, there had been no glimpse of sky. 


3 . 

TRANTOR-...At the beginning of the thirteenth millennium, this tendency reached its climax. As 
the center of the imperial Government for unbroken hundreds of generations and located, as it 
was, toward the central regions of the Galaxy among the most densely populated and 
industrially advanced worlds of the system, it could scarcely help being the densest and richest 
clot of humanity the Race had ever seen. 

Its urbanization, progressing steadily, had finally reached the ultimate. All the land surface of 
Trantor, 75,000,000 square miles in extent, was a single city. The population, at its height, was 
well in excess of forty billions. This enormous population was devoted almost entirely to the 
administrative necessities of Empire, and found themselves all too few for the complications of 
the task. (It is to be remembered that the impossibility of proper administration of the Galactic 
Empire under the uninspired leadership of the later Emperors was a considerable factor in the 
Fall.) Daily, fleets of ships in the tens of thousands brought the produce of twenty agricultural 
worlds to the dinner tables of Trantor.... 

Its dependence upon the outer worlds for food and, indeed, for all necessities of life, made 
Trantor increasingly vulnerable to conquest by siege. In the last millennium of the Empire, the 
monotonously numerous revolts made Emperor after Emperor conscious of this, and Imperial 



policy became little more than the protection of Trantor's delicate jugular vein.... 
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

Gaal was not certain whether the sun shone, or, for that matter, whether it was day or night. He 
was ashamed to ask. All the planet seemed to live beneath metal. The meal of which he had 
just partaken had been labelled luncheon, but there were many planets which lived a standard 
timescale that took no account of the perhaps inconvenient alternation of day and night. The 
rate of planetary turnings differed, and he did not know that of Trantor. 

At first, he had eagerly followed the signs to the "Sun Room" and found it but a chamber for 
basking in artificial radiation. He lingered a moment or two, then returned to the Luxor's main 
lobby. 

He said to the room clerk, "Where can I buy a ticket for a planetary tour?" 

"Right here." 

"When will it start?" 

"You just missed it. Another one tomorrow. Buy a ticket now and we'll reserve a place for you." 

"Oh." Tomorrow would be too late. He would have to be at the University tomorrow. He said, 
"There wouldn't be an observation tower - or something? I mean, in the open air." 

"Sure! Sell you a ticket for that, if you want. Better let me check if it's raining or not." He closed 
a contact at his elbow and read the flowing letters that raced across a frosted screen. Gaal read 
with him. 

The room clerk said, "Good weather. Come to think of it, I do believe it's the dry season now." 
He added, conversationally, "I don't bother with the outside myself. The last time I was in the 
open was three years ago. You see it once, you know and that's all there is to it. Here's your 
ticket. Special elevator in the rear. It's marked 'To the Tower.' Just take it." 

The elevator was of the new sort that ran by gravitic repulsion. Gaal entered and others flowed 
in behind him. The operator closed a contact. For a moment, Gaal felt suspended in space as 
gravity switched to zero, and then he had weight again in small measure as the elevator 
accelerated upward. Deceleration followed and his feet left the floor. He squawked against his 
will. 

The operator called out, "Tuck your feet under the railing. Can't you read the sign?" 

The others had done so. They were smiling at him as he madly and vainly tried to clamber back 
down the wall. Their shoes pressed upward against the chromium of the railings that stretched 
across the floor in parallels set two feet apart. He had noticed those railings on entering and 
had ignored them. 

Then a hand reached out and pulled him down. 

He gasped his thanks as the elevator came to a halt. 

He stepped out upon an open terrace bathed in a white brilliance that hurl his eyes. The man, 



whose helping hand he had just now been the recipient of, was immediately behind him. 

The man said, kindly, "Plenty of seats." 

Gaal closed his mouth; he had been gaping; and said, "It certainly seems so." He started for 
them automatically, then stopped. 

He said, "If you don't mind, I'll just stop a moment at the railing. I - I want to look a bit." 

The man waved him on, good-naturedly, and Gaal leaned out over the shoulder-high railing 
and bathed himself in all the panorama. 

He could not see the ground. It was lost in the ever increasing complexities of man-made 
structures. He could see no horizon other than that of metal against sky, stretching out to 
almost uniform grayness, and he knew it was so over all the land-surface of the planet. There 
was scarcely any motion to be seen - a few pleasure-craft lazed against the sky-but all the 
busy traffic of billions of men were going on, he knew, beneath the metal skin of the world. 

There was no green to be seen; no green, no soil, no life other than man. Somewhere on the 
world, he realized vaguely, was the Emperor's palace, set amid one hundred square miles of 
natural soil, green with trees, rainbowed with flowers. It was a small island amid an ocean of 
steel, but it wasn't visible from where he stood. It might be ten thousand miles away. He did not 
know. 

Before very long, he must have his tour! 

He sighed noisily, and realized finally that he was on Trantor at last; on the planet which was 
the center of all the Galaxy and the kernel of the human race. He saw none of its weaknesses. 
He saw no ships of food landing. He was not aware of a jugular vein delicately connecting the 
forty billion of Trantor with the rest of the Galaxy. He was conscious only of the mightiest deed 
of man; the complete and almost contemptuously final conquest of a world.
