Outside the hall, a small army awaited events. Ponyets was effectively isolated from his ship; 
he lacked any weapon, but his attempted bribe; and Gorov was still a hostage. 



He made the final adjustments on the clumsy monstrosity that had cost him a week of 
ingenuity, and prayed once again that the lead-lined quartz would stand the strain. 

"What is it?" asked the Grand Master. 

"This," said Ponyets, stepping back, "is a small device I have constructed myself." 

"That is obvious, but it is not the information I want. Is it one of the black-magic abominations of 
your world?" 

"It is nuclear in nature, admitted Ponyets, gravely, "but none of you need touch it, or have 
anything to do with it. It is for myself alone, and if it contains abominations, I take the foulness 
of it upon myself." 

The Grand Master had raised his iron cane at the machine in a threatening gesture and his lips 
moved rapidly and silently in a purifying invocation. The thin-faced councilor at his right leaned 
towards him and his straggled red mustache approached the Grand Master's ear. The ancient 
Askonian petulantly shrugged himself free. 

"And what is the connection of your instrument of evil and the gold that may save your 
countryman's life?" 

"With this machine," began Ponyets, as his hand dropped softly onto the central chamber and 
caressed its hard, round flanks, "I can turn the iron you discard into gold of the finest quality. It 
is the only device known to man that will take iron - the ugly iron, your Veneration, that props 
up the chair you sit in and the walls of this building - and change it to shining, heavy, yellow 
gold." 

Ponyets felt himself botching it. His usual sales talk was smooth, facile and plausible; but this 
limped like a shot-up space wagon. But it was the content, not the form, that interested the 
Grand Master. 

"So? Transmutation? Men have been fools who have claimed the ability. They have paid for 
their prying sacrilege." 

"Had they succeeded?" 

"No." The Grand Master seemed coldly amused. "Success at producing gold would have been 
a crime that carried its own antidote. It is the attempt plus the failure that is fatal. Here, what 
can you do with my staff?" He pounded the floor with it. 

"Your Veneration will excuse me. My device is a small model, prepared by myself, and your 
staff is too long." 

The Grand Master's small shining eye wandered and stopped, "Randel, your buckles. Come, 
man, they shall be replaced double if need be." 

The buckles passed down the line, hand to hand. The Grand Master weighed them 
thoughtfully. 


Here," he said, and threw them to the floor. 



Ponyets picked them up. He tugged hard before the cylinder opened, and his eyes blinked and 
squinted with effort as he centered the buckles carefully on the anode screen. Later, it would be 
easier but there must be no failures the first time. 

The homemade transmuter crackled malevolently for ten minutes while the odor of ozone 
became faintly present. The Askonians backed away, muttering, and again Pherl whispered 
urgently into his ruler's ear. The Grand Master's expression was stony. He did not budge. 

And the buckles were gold. 

Ponyets held them out to the Grand Master with a murmured, "Your Veneration!" but the old 
man hesitated, then gestured them away. His stare lingered upon the transmuter. 

Ponyets said rapidly, "Gentlemen, this is pure gold. Gold through and through. You may subject 
it to every known physical and chemical test, if you wish to prove the point. It cannot be 
identified from naturally-occurring gold in any way. Any iron can be so treated. Rust will not 
interfere, not will a moderate amount of alloying metals-" 

But Ponyets spoke only to fill a vacuum. He let the buckles remain in his outstretched hand, 
and it was the gold that argued for him. 

The Grand Master stretched out a slow hand at last, and the thin-faced Pherl was roused to 
open speech. "Your Veneration, the gold is from a poisoned source." 

And Ponyets countered, "A rose can grow from the mud, your Veneration. In your dealings with 
your neighbors, you buy material of all imaginable variety, without inquiring as to where they 
get it, whether from an orthodox machine blessed by your benign ancestors or from some 
space-spawned outrage. Come, I don't offer the machine. I offer the gold." 

"Your Veneration," said Pherl, "you are not responsible for the sins of foreigners who work 
neither with your consent nor knowledge. But to accept this strange pseudo-gold made sinfully 
from iron in your presence and with your consent is an affront to the living spirits of our holy 
ancestors." 

"Yet gold is gold," said the Grand Master, doubtfully, "and is but an exchange for the heathen 
person of a convicted felon. Pherl, you are too critical." But he withdrew his hand. 

Ponyets said, "You are wisdom, itself, your Veneration. Consider - to give up a heathen is to 
lose nothing for your ancestors, whereas with the gold you get in exchange you can ornament 
the shrines of their holy spirits. And surely, were gold evil in itself, if such, a thing could be, the 
evil would depart of necessity once the metal were put to such pious use." 

"Now by the bones of my grandfather," said the Grand Master with surprising vehemence. His 
lips separated in a shrill laugh, "Pherl, what do you say of this young man? The statement is 
valid. It is as valid as the words of my ancestors." 

Pherl said gloomily, "So it would seem. Grant that the validity does not turn out to be a device 
of the Malignant Spirit." 

"I'll make it even better," said Ponyets, suddenly. "Hold the gold in hostage. Place it on the 



altars of your ancestors as an offering and hold me for thirty days. If at the end of that time, 
there is no evidence of displeasure - if no disasters occur - surely, it would be proof that the 
offering was accepted. What more can be offered?" 

And when the Grand Master rose to his feet to search out disapproval, not a man in the council 
failed to signal his agreement. Even Pherl chewed the ragged end of his mustache and nodded 
curtly. 

Ponyets smiled and meditated on the uses of a religious education. 


5 . 

Another week rubbed away before the meeting with Pherl was arranged. Ponyets felt the 
tension, but he was used to the feeling of physical helplessness now. He had left city limits 
under guard. He was in Pherl's suburban villa under guard. There was nothing to do but accept 
it without even looking over his shoulder. 

Pherl was taller and younger outside the circle of Elders. In nonformal costume, he seemed no 
Elder at all. 

He said abruptly, "You're a peculiar man." His close-set eyes seemed to quiver. "You've done 
nothing this last week, and particularly these last two hours, but imply that I need gold. It seems 
useless labor, for who does not? Why not advance one step?" 

"It is not simply gold," said Ponyets, discreetly. "Not simply gold. Not merely a coin or two. It is 
rather all that lies behind gold." 

"Now what can lie behind gold?" prodded Pherl, with a down-curved smile. "Certainly this is not 
the preliminary of another clumsy demonstration." 

"Clumsy?" Ponyets frowned slightly. 

"Oh, definitely." Pherl folded his hands and nudged them gently with his chin. "I don't criticize 
you. The clumsiness was on purpose, I am sure. I might have warned his Veneration of that, 
had I been certain of the motive. Now had I been you, I would have produced the gold upon my 
ship, and offered it alone. The show you offered us and the antagonism you aroused would 
have been dispensed with." 

"True," Ponyets admitted, "but since I was myself, I accepted the antagonism for the sake of 
attracting your attention." 


"Is that it? Simply that?" Pherl made no effort to hide his contemptuous amusement. "And I 
imagine you suggested the thirty-day purification period that you might assure yourself time to 
turn the attraction into something a bit more substantial. But what if the gold turns out to be 
impure?" 

Ponyets allowed himself a dark humor in return, "When the judgement of that impurity depends 



upon those who are most interested in finding it pure?" 

Pherl lifted his eyes and stared narrowly at the trader. He seemed at once surprised and 
satisfied. 

"A sensible point. Now tell me why you wished to attract me." 

"This I will do. In the short time I have been here, I have observed useful facts that concern you 
and interest me. For instance, you are young-very young for a member of the council, and even 
of a relatively young family." 

"You criticize my family?" 

"Not at all. Your ancestors are great and holy; all will admit that. But there are those that say 
you are not a member of one of the Five Tribes."
