His uncle broke in firmly and continued, "However, you will come of age in two months. 
Moreover, in the difficult times that are coming, you will have to take a full and active part. You 
will be king henceforward, Lepold." 

Again Lepold nodded, but his expression was quite blank. 

"There will be war, Lepold." 

"War! But there's been truce with Smyrno-" 

"Not Smyrno. The Foundation itself." 

"But, uncle, they've agreed to repair the ship. You said-" 

His voice choked off at the twist of his uncle's lip. 

"Lepold" - some of the friendliness had gone -"we are to talk man to man. There is to be war 
with the Foundation, whether the ship is repaired or not; all the sooner, in fact, since it is being 
repaired. The Foundation is the source of power and might. All the greatness of Anacreon; all 
its ships and its cities and its people and its commerce depend on the dribbles and leavings of 
power that the Foundation have given us grudgingly. I remember the time - I, myself - when 
the cities of Anacreon were warmed by the burning of coal and oil. But never mind that; you 
would have no conception of it." 

"It seems," suggested the king timidly, "that we ought to be grateful-" 

"Grateful?" roared Wienis. "Grateful that they begrudge us the merest dregs, while keeping 
space knows what for themselves - and keeping it with what purpose in mind? Why, only that 
they may some day rule the Galaxy." 

His hand came down on his nephew's knee, and his eyes narrowed. "Lepold, you are king of 
Anacreon. Your children and your children's children may be kings of the universe - if you have 
the power that the Foundation is keeping from us!" 

"There's something in that." Lepold's eyes gained a sparkle and his back straightened. "After 
all, what right have they to keep it to themselves? Not fair, you know. Anacreon counts for 
something, too." 

"You see, you're beginning to understand. And now, my boy, what if Smyrno decides to attack 
the Foundation for its own part and thus gains all that power? How long do you suppose we 
could escape becoming a vassal power? How long would you hold your throne?" 

Lepold grew excited. "Space, yes. You're absolutely right, you know. We must strike first. It's 
simply self-defense." 

Wienis' smile broadened slightly. "Furthermore, once, at the very beginning of the reign of your 
grandfather, Anacreon actually established a military base on the Foundation's planet, 

Terminus - a base vitally needed for national defense. We were forced to abandon that base 
as a result of the machinations of the leader of that Foundation, a sly cur, a scholar, with not a 
drop of noble blood in his veins. You understand, Lepold? Your grandfather was humiliated by 
this commoner. I remember him! He was scarcely older than myself when he came to 



Anacreon with his devil's smile and devil's brain - and the power of the other three kingdoms 
behind him, combined in cowardly union against the greatness of Anacreon." 

Lepold flushed and the sparkle in his eyes blazed. "By Seldon, if I had been my grandfather, I 
would have fought even so." 

"No, Lepold. We decided to wait - to wipe out the insult at a fitter time. It had been your father's 
hope, before his untimely death, that he might be the one to - Well, well!" Wienis turned away 
for a moment. Then, as if stifling emotion, "He was my brother. And yet, if his son were-" 

"Yes, uncle, I'll not fail him. I have decided. It seems only proper that Anacreon wipe out this 
nest of troublemakers, and that immediately." 

"No, not immediately. First, we must wait for the repairs of the battle cruiser to be completed. 
The mere fact that they are willing to undertake these repairs proves that they fear us. The 
fools attempt to placate us, but we are not to be turned from our path, are we?" 

And Lepold's fist slammed against his cupped palm. 

"Not while I am king in Anacreon." 

Wienis' lip twitched sardonically. "Besides which we must wait for Salvor Hardin to arrive." 

"Salvor Hardin!" The king grew suddenly round-eyed, and the youthful contour of his beardless 
face lost the almost hard lines into which they had been compressed. 

"Yes, Lepold, the leader of the Foundation himself is coming to Anacreon on your birthday - 
probably to soothe us with buttered words. But it won't help him." 

"Salvor Hardin!" It was the merest murmur. 

Wienis frowned. "Are you afraid of the name? It is the same Salvor Hardin, who on his previous 
visit, ground our noses into the dust. You're not forgetting that deadly insult to the royal house? 
And from a commoner. The dregs of the gutter." 

"No. I guess not. No, I won't. I won't! We'll pay him back - but.. .but - I'm afraid - a little." 

The regent rose. "Afraid? Of what? Of what, you young-" He choked off. 

"It would be. ..uh.. .sort of blasphemous, you know, to attack the Foundation. I mean-" He 
paused. 

"Go on." 

Lepold said confusedly, "I mean, if there were really a Galactic Spirit, he...uh...it mightn't like it. 
Don't you think? 

"No, I don't," was the hard answer. Wienis sat down again and his lips twisted in a queer smile. 
"And so you 

really bother your head a great deal over the Galactic Spirit, do you? That's what comes of 
letting you run wild. You've been listening to Verisof quite a bit, I take it." 



He's explained a great deal-' 
About the Galactic Spirit?" 


"Yes." 

"Why, you unweaned cub, he believes in that mummery a good deal less than I do, and I don't 
believe in it at all. How many times have you been told that all this talk is nonsense?" 

"Well, I know that. But Verisof says-" 

"Pay no heed to Verisof. It's nonsense." 

There was a short, rebellious silence, and then Lepold said, "Everyone believes it just the 
same. I mean all this talk about the Prophet Hari Seldon and how he appointed the Foundation 
to carry on his commandments that there might some day be a return of the Galactic Paradise: 
and how anyone who disobeys his commandments will be destroyed for eternity. They believe 
it. I've presided at festivals, and I'm sure they do." 

"Yes, they do ; but we don't. And you may be thankful it's so, for according to this foolishness, 
you are king by divine right - and are semi-divine yourself. Very handy. It eliminates all 
possibilities of revolts and insures absolute obedience in everything. And that is why, Lepold, 
you must take an active part in ordering the war against the Foundation. I am only regent, and 
quite human. You are king, and more than half a god - to them." 

"But I suppose I'm not really," said the king reflectively. 

"No, not really," came the sardonic response, "but you are to everyone but the people of the 
Foundation. Get that? To everyone but those of the Foundation. Once they are removed there 
will be no one to deny you the godhead. Think of that!" 

"And after that we will ourselves be able to operate the power boxes of the temples and the 
ships that fly without men and the holy food that cures cancer and all the rest? Verisof said only 
those blessed with the Galactic Spirit could-" 

"Yes, Verisof said! Verisof, next to Salvor Hardin, is your greatest enemy. Stay with me, Lepold, 
and don't worry about them. Together we will recreate an empire-not just the kingdom of 
Anacreon-but one comprising every one of the billions of suns of the Empire. Is that better than 
a wordy 'Galactic Paradise'?" 

"Ye-es." 

"Can Verisof promise more?" 

"No." 

"Very well." His voice became peremptory. "I suppose we may consider the matter settled." He 
waited for no answer. "Get along. I'll be down later. And just one thing, Lepold." 

The young king turned on the threshold. 



Wienis was smiling with all but his eyes. "Be careful on these Nyak hunts, my boy. Since the 
unfortunate accident to your father, I have had the strangest presentiments concerning you, at 
times. In the confusion, with needle guns thickening the air with darts, one can never tell. You 
will be careful, I hope. And you'll do as I say about the Foundation, won't you?" 

Lepold's eyes widened and dropped away from those of his uncle. "Yes - certainly." 

"Good!" He stared after his departing nephew, expressionlessly, and returned to his desk. 

And Lepold's thoughts as he left were somber and not unfearful. Perhaps it would be best to 
defeat the Foundation and gain the power Wienis spoke of. But afterward, when the war was 
over and he was secure on his throne- He became acutely conscious of the fact that Wienis 
and his two arrogant sons were at present next in line to the throne. 

But he was king. And kings could order people executed.
