"That was obvious." 

"Sure, but word against simple word wasn't all there was to it. You see, Pherl had never heard 
nor conceived of a microfilm-recorder." 

Gorov laughed suddenly. 

"That's right," said Ponyets. "He had the upper hand. I was properly chastened. But when I set 



up the transmuter for him in my whipped-dog fashion, I incorporated the recorder into the 
device and removed it in the next day's overhaul. I had a perfect record of his sanctum 
sanctorum, his holy-of-holies, with he himself, poor Pherl, operating the transmuter for all the 
ergs it had and crowing over his first piece of gold as if it were an egg he had just laid." 

"You showed him the results?" 

"Two days later. The poor sap had never seen three-dimensional color-sound images in his life. 
He claims he isn't superstitious, but if I ever saw an adult look as scared as he did then, call me 
rookie. When I told him I had a recorder planted in the city square, set to go off at midday with a 
million fanatical Askonians to watch, and to tear him to pieces subsequently, he was gibbering 
at my knees in half a second. He was ready to make any deal I wanted." 

"Did you?" Gorov's voice was suppressing laughter. "I mean, have one planted in the city 
square." 

"No, but that didn't matter. He made the deal. He bought every gadget I had, and every one you 
had for as much tin as we could carry. At that moment, he believed me capable of anything. 

The agreement is in writing and you'll have a copy before I go down with him, just as another 
precaution." 

"But you've damaged his ego," said Gorov. "Will he use the gadgets?" 

"Why not? It's his only way of recouping his losses, and if he makes money out of it, he'll salve 
his pride. And he will be the next Grand Master - and the best man we could have in our favor." 

"Yes," said Gorov, "it was a good sale. Yet you've certainly got an uncomfortable sales 
technique. No wonder you were kicked out of a seminary. Have you no sense of morals?" 

"What are the odds?" said Ponyets, indifferently. "You know what Salvor Hardin said about a 
sense of morals." 

PART V 

THE MERCHANT PRINCES 


i. 

TRADERS-... With psychohistoric inevitability, economic control of the Foundation grew. The 
traders grew rich; and with riches came power.... 

It is sometimes forgotten that Hober Mallow began life as an ordinary trader. It is never 
forgotten that he ended it as the first of the Merchant Princes.... 


ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 




Jorane Sutt put the tips of carefully-manicured fingers together and said, "It's something of a 
puzzle. In fact - and this is in the strictest of confidence - it may be another one of Hari 
Seldon's crises." 

The man opposite felt in the pocket of his short Smyrnian jacket for a cigarette. "Don't know 
about that, Sutt. As a general rule, politicians start shouting 'Seldon crisis' at every mayoralty 
campaign." 

Sutt smiled very faintly, "I'm not campaigning, Mallow. We're facing nuclear weapons, and we 
don't know where they're coming from." 

Hober Mallow of Smyrno, Master Trader, smoked quietly, almost indifferently. "Go on. If you 
have more to say, get it out." Mallow never made the mistake of being overpolite to a 
Foundation man. He might be an Outlander, but a man's a man for a’ that. 

Sutt indicated the trimensional star-map on the table. He adjusted the controls and a cluster of 
some half-dozen stellar systems blazed red. 

'That," he said quietly, "is the Korellian Republic." 

The trader nodded, "I've been there. Stinking rathole! I suppose you can call it a republic but it's 
always someone out of the Argo family that gets elected Commdor each time. And if you ever 
don't like it - things happen to you." He twisted his lip and repeated, "I've been there." 

"But you've come back, which hasn't always happened. Three trade ships, inviolate under the 
Conventions, have disappeared within the territory of the Republic in the last year. And those 
ships were armed with all the usual nuclear explosives and force-field defenses." 

"What was the last word heard from the ships?" 

"Routine reports. Nothing else." 

"What did Korell say?" 

Sutt's eyes gleamed sardonically, "There was no way of asking. The Foundation's greatest 
asset throughout the Periphery is its reputation of power. Do you think we can lose three ships 
and ask for them?" 

"Well, then, suppose you tell me what you want with me." 

Jorane Sutt did not waste his time in the luxury of annoyance. As secretary to the mayor, he 
had held off opposition councilmen, jobseekers, reformers, and crackpots who claimed to have 
solved in its entirety the course of future history as worked out by Hari Seldon. With training like 
that, it took a good deal to disturb him. 

He said methodically, "In a moment. You see, three ships lost in the same sector in the same 
year can't be accident, and nuclear power can be conquered only by more nuclear power. The 
question automatically arises: if Korell has nuclear weapons, where is it getting them?" 


And where does it? 



"Two alternatives. Either the Korellians have constructed them themselves-" 

"Far-fetched!" 

"Very! But the other possibility is that we are being afflicted with a case of treason." 

"You think so?" Mallow's voice was cold. 

The secretary said calmly, "There's nothing miraculous about the possibility. Since the Four 
Kingdoms accepted the Foundation Convention, we have had to deal with considerable groups 
of dissident populations in each nation. Each former kingdom has its pretenders and its former 
noblemen, who can't very well pretend to love the Foundation. Some of them are becoming 
active, perhaps." 

Mallow was a dull red. "I see. Is there anything you want to say to me? I'm a Smyrnian." 

"I know. You're a Smyrnian - born in Smyrno, one of the former Four Kingdoms. You're a 
Foundation man by education only. By birth, you're an Outlander and a foreigner. No doubt 
your grandfather was a baron at the time of the wars with Anacreon and Loris, and no doubt 
your family estates were taken away when Sef Sermak redistributed the land." 

"No, by Black Space, no! My grandfather was a blood-poor son-of-a-spacer who died heaving 
coal at starving wages before the Foundation took over. I owe nothing to the old regime. But I 
was born in Smyrno, and I'm not ashamed of either Smyrno or Smyrnians, by the Galaxy. Your 
sly little hints of treason aren't going to panic me into licking Foundation spittle. And now you 
can either give your orders or make your accusations. I don't care which." 

"My good Master Trader, I don't care an electron whether your grandfather was King of Smyrno 
or the greatest pauper on the planet. I recited that rigmarole about your birth and ancestry to 
show you that I'm not interested in them. Evidently, you missed the point. Let's go back now. 
You're a Smyrnian. You know the Outlanders. Also, you're a trader and one of the best. You've 
been to Korell and you know the Korellians. That's where you've got to go." 

Mallow breathed deeply, "As a spy?" 

"Not at all. As a trader - but with your eyes open. If you can find out where the power is coming 
from - I might remind you, since you're a Smyrnian, that two of those lost trade ships had 
Smyrnian crews." 

"When do I start?" 

"When will your ship be ready?" 

"In six days." 

"Then that's when you start. You'll have all the details at the Admiralty." 

"Right!" The trader rose, shook hands roughly, and strode out. 

Sutt waited, spreading his fingers gingerly and rubbing out the pressure; then shrugged his 
shoulders and stepped into the mayor's office. 



The mayor deadened the visiplate and leaned back. "What do you make of it, Sutt?" 
"He could be a good actor," said Sutt, and stared thoughtfully ahead. 


2 . 

It was evening of the same day, and in Jorane Sutt's bachelor apartment on the twenty-first 
floor of the Hardin Building, Publis Manlio was sipping wine slowly. 

It was Publis Manlio in whose slight, aging body were fulfilled two great offices of the 
Foundation. He was Foreign Secretary in the mayor's cabinet, and to all the outer suns, barring 
only the Foundation itself, he was, in addition, Primate of the Church, Purveyor of the Holy 
Food, Master of the Temples, and so forth almost indefinitely in confusing but sonorous 
syllables. 

He was saying, "But he agreed to let you send out that trader. It is a point." 

"But such a small one," said Sutt. "It gets us nothing immediately. The whole business is the 
crudest sort of stratagem, since we have no way of foreseeing it to the end. It is a mere paying 
out of rope on the chance that somewhere along the length of it will be a noose." 

"True. And this Mallow is a capable man. What if he is not an easy prey to dupery?"
