Everyone tried to talk at once and Sermak was slamming the table for silence, when the front 
door opened and Levi Norast stamped in. He bounded up the stairs, overcoat on, trailing snow. 


"Look at that!" he cried, tossing a cold, snow-speckled newspaper onto the table. "The 
visicasters are full of it, too." 


The newspaper was unfolded and five heads bent over it. 


Sermak said, in a hushed voice, "Great Space, he’s going to Anacreon! Going to Anacreon!" 


It is treason," squeaked Tarki, in sudden excitement. "I’ll be damned if Walto isn’t right. He’s 



sold us out and now he’s going there to collect his wage. 


Sermak had risen. "We’ve no choice now. I’m going to ask the Council tomorrow that Hardin be 
impeached. And if that fails-" 


5. 

The snow had ceased, but it caked the ground deeply now and the sleek ground car advanced 
through the deserted streets with lumbering effort. The murky gray light of incipient dawn was 
cold not only in the poetical sense but also in a very literal way - and even in the then turbulent 
state of the Foundation's politics, no one, whether Actionist or pro-Hardin found his spirits 
sufficiently ardent to begin street activity that early. 

Yohan Lee did not like that and his grumblings grew audible. "It's going to look bad, Hardin. 
They're going to say you sneaked away." 

"Let them say it if they wish. I've got to get to Anacreon and I want to do it without trouble. Now 
that's enough, Lee." 

Hardin leaned back into the cushioned seat and shivered slightly. It wasn't cold inside the 
well-heated car, but there was something frigid about a snow-covered world, even through 
glass, that annoyed him. 

He said, reflectively, "Some day when we get around to it we ought to weather-condition 
Terminus. It could be done." 

"I," replied Lee, "would like to see a few other things done first. For instance, what about 
weather-conditioning Sermak? A nice, dry cell fitted for twenty-five centigrade all year round 
would be just fight." 

"And then I'd really need bodyguards," said Hardin, "and not just those two," He indicated two 
of Lee's bully-boys sitting up front with the driver, hard eyes on the empty streets, ready hands 
at their atom blasts. "You evidently want to stir up civil war." 

"I do? There are other sticks in the fire and it won't require much stirring, I can tell you." He 
counted off on blunt fingers, "One: Sermak raised hell yesterday in the City Council and called 
for an impeachment." 

"He had a perfect right to do so," responded Hardin, coolly. "Besides which, his motion was 
defeated 206 to 184." 

"Certainly. A majority of twenty-two when we had counted on sixty as a minimum. Don't deny it; 
you know you did." 


It was close," admitted Hardin. 



"All right. And two; after the vote, the fifty-nine members of the Actionist Party reared upon their 
hind legs and stamped out of the Council Chambers." 

Hardin was silent, and Lee continued, "And three: Before leaving, Sermak howled that you 
were a traitor, that you were going to Anacreon to collect your payment, that the Chamber 
majority in refusing to vote impeachment had participated in the treason, and that the name of 
their party was not 'Actionist' for nothing. What does that sound like?" 

"Trouble, I suppose." 

"And now you're chasing off at daybreak, like a criminal. You ought to face them, Hardin - and 
if you have to, declare martial law, by space!" 

"Violence is the last refuge-" 

"-Of the incompetent. Bah!" 

"All right. We'll see. Now listen to me carefully, Lee. Thirty years ago, the Time Vault opened, 
and on the fiftieth anniversary of the beginning of the Foundation, there appeared a Hari Seldon 
recording to give us our first idea of what was really going on." 

"I remember," Lee nodded reminiscently, with a half smile. "It was the day we took over the 
government." 

"That's right. It was the time of our first major crisis. This is our second-and three weeks from 
today will be the eightieth anniversary of the beginning of the Foundation. Does that strike you 
as in any way significant?" 

"You mean he's coming again?" 

"I'm not finished. Seldon never said anything about returning, you understand, but that's of a 
piece with his whole plan. He's always done his best to keep all foreknowledge from us. Nor is 
there any way of telling whether the computer is set for further openings short of dismantling 
the Vault - and it's probably set to destroy itself if we were to try that. I've been there every 
anniversary since the first appearance, just on the chance. He's never shown up, but this is the 
first time since then that there's really been a crisis." 

"Then he'll come." 

"Maybe. I don't know. However, this is the point. At today's session of the Council, just after you 
announce that I have left for Anacreon, you will further announce, officially, that on March 14th 
next, there will be another Hari Seldon recording, containing a message of the utmost 
importance regarding the recent successfully concluded crisis. That's very important, Lee. Don't 
add anything more no matter how many questions are asked." 

Lee stared. "Will they believe it?" 

"That doesn't matter. It will confuse them, which is all I want. Between wondering whether it is 
true and what I mean by it if it isn't - they'll decide to postpone action till after March 1 4th. I'll be 
back considerably before then." 



Lee looked uncertain. "But that 'successfully concluded.' That's bull!" 

"Highly confusing bull. Here's the airport!" 

The waiting spaceship bulked somberly in the dimness. Hardin stamped through the snow 
toward it and at the open air lock turned about with outstretched hand. 

"Good-by, Lee. I hate to leave you in the frying pan like this, but there's not another I can trust. 
Now please keep out of the fire." 

"Don't worry. The frying pan is hot enough. I'll follow orders." He stepped back, and the air lock 
closed. 


6 . 


Salvor Hardin did not travel to the planet Anacreon - from which planet the kingdom derived its 
name - immediately. It was only on the day before the coronation that he arrived, after having 
made flying visits to eight of the larger stellar systems of the kingdom, stopping only long, 
enough to confer with the local representatives of the Foundation. 

The trip left him with an oppressive realization of the vastness of the kingdom. It was a little 
splinter, an insignificant fly speck compared to the inconceivable reaches of the Galactic 
Empire of which it had once formed so distinguished a part; but to one whose habits of thought 
had been built around a single planet, and a sparsely settled one at that, Anacreon's size in 
area and population was staggering. 

Following closely the boundaries of the old Prefect of Anacreon, it embraced twenty-five stellar 
systems, six of which included more than one inhabited world. The population of nineteen 
billion, though still far less than it had been in the Empire's heyday was rising rapidly with the 
increasing scientific development fostered by the Foundation. 

And it was only now that Hardin found himself floored by the magnitude of that task. Even in 
thirty years, only the capital world had been powered. The outer provinces still possessed 
immense stretches where nuclear power had not yet been re-introduced. Even the progress 
that had been made might have been impossible had it not been for the still workable relics left 
over by the ebbing tide of Empire. 

When Hardin did arrive at the capital world, it was to find all normal business at an absolute 
standstill. In the outer provinces there had been and still were celebrations; but here on the 
planet Anacreon, not a person but took feverish part in the hectic religious pageantry that 
heralded the coming-of-age of their god-king, Lepold. 

Hardin had been able to snatch only half an hour from a haggard and harried Verisof before his 
ambassador was forced to rush off to supervise still another temple festival. But the half-hour 
was a most profitable one, and Hardin prepared himself for the night's fireworks well satisfied. 

In all, he acted as an observer, for he had no stomach for the religious tasks he would 



undoubtedly have had to undertake if his identity became known. So, when the palace's 
ballroom filled itself with a glittering horde of the kingdom's very highest and most exalted 
nobility, he found himself hugging the wall, little noticed or totally ignored. 

He had been introduced to Lepold as one of a long line of introducees, and from a safe 
distance, for the king stood apart in lonely and impressive grandeur, surrounded by his deadly 
blaze of radioactive aura. And in less than an hour this same king would take his seat upon the 
massive throne of rhodium-iridium alloy with jewel-set gold chasings, and then, throne and all 
would rise maestically into the air, skim the ground slowly to hover before the great window 
from which the great crowds of common folk could see their king and shout themselves into 
near apoplexy. The throne would not have been so massive, of course, if it had not had a 
shielded nuclear motor built into it.
