He came away a little blank-eyed. His friend of the elevator was indicating a seat next to 
himself and Gaal took it. 

The man smiled. "My name is Jerril. First time on Trantor?" 

"Yes, Mr. Jerril." 

"Thought so. Jerril's my first name. Trantor gets you if you've got the poetic temperament. 
Trantorians never come up here, though. They don't like it. Gives them nerves." 

"Nerves! - My name's Gaal, by the way. Why should it give them nerves? It's glorious." 

"Subjective matter of opinion, Gaal. If you're born in a cubicle and grow up in a corridor, and 
work in a cell, and vacation in a crowded sun-room, then coming up into the open with nothing 
but sky over you might just give you a nervous breakdown. They make the children come up 
here once a year, after they're five. I don't know if it does any good. They don't get enough of it, 
really, and the first few times they scream themselves into hysteria. They ought to start as soon 
as they're weaned and have the trip once a week." 



He went on, "Of course, it doesn't really matter. What if they never come out at all? They're 
happy down there and they run the Empire. How high up do you think we are?" 

He said, "Half a mile?" and wondered if that sounded naive. 

It must have, for Jerril chuckled a little. He said, "No. Just five hundred feet." 

"What? But the elevator took about 

"I know. But most of the time it was just getting up to ground level. Trantor is tunneled over a 
mile down. It's like an iceberg. Nine-tenths of it is out of sight. It even works itself out a few 
miles into the sub-ocean soil at the shorelines. In fact, we're down so low that we can make use 
of the temperature difference between ground level and a couple of miles under to supply us 
with all the energy we need. Did you know that?" 

"No, I thought you used atomic generators." 

"Did once. But this is cheaper." 

"I imagine so." 

"What do you think of it all?" For a moment, the man's good nature evaporated into 
shrewdness. He looked almost sly. 

Gaal fumbled. "Glorious," he said, again. 

"Here on vacation? Traveling? Sight-seeing?" 

"No exactly. At least, I've always wanted to visit Trantor but I came here primarily for a job." 
"Oh?" 

Gaal felt obliged to explain further, "With Dr. Seldon's project at the University of Trantor." 
"Raven Seldon?" 

"Why, no. The one I mean is Hari Seldon. -The psychohistorian Seldon. I don't know of any 
Raven Seldon." 

"Hari's the one I mean. They call him Raven. Slang, you know. He keeps predicting disaster." 
"He does?" Gaal was genuinely astonished. 

"Surely, you must know." Jerril was not smiling. "You're coming to work for him, aren't you?" 
"Well, yes, I'm a mathematician. Why does he predict disaster? What kind of disaster?" 

"What kind would you think?" 

"I'm afraid I wouldn't have the least idea. I've read the papers Dr. Seldon and his group have 
published. They're on mathematical theory." 

"Yes, the ones they publish." 



Gaal felt annoyed. He said, "I think I'll go to my room now. Very pleased to have met you." 

Jerril waved his arm indifferently in farewell. 

Gaal found a man waiting for him in his room. For a moment, he was too startled to put into 
words the inevitable, "What are you doing here?" that came to his lips. 

The man rose. He was old and almost bald and he walked with a limp, but his eyes were very 
bright and blue. 

He said, "I am Hari Seldon," an instant before Gaal's befuddled brain placed the face alongside 
the memory of the many times he had seen it in pictures. 


4 . 

PSYCHOHISTORY-.. .Gaal Dornick, using nonmathematical concepts, has defined 
psychohistory to be that branch of mathematics which deals with the reactions of human 
conglomerates to fixed social and economic stimuli.... 

... Implicit in all these definitions is the assumption that the human conglomerate being dealt 
with is sufficiently large for valid statistical treatment. The necessary size of such a 
conglomerate may be determined by Seldon 's First Theorem which ...A further necessary 
assumption is that the human conglomerate be itself unaware of psychohistoric analysis in 
order that its reactions be truly random ... 

The basis of all valid psychohistory lies in the development of the Seldon. Functions which 
exhibit properties congruent to those of such social and economic forces as ... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

"Good afternoon, sir," said Gaal. "I- I-" 

"You didn't think we were to meet before tomorrow? Ordinarily, we would not have. It is just that 
if we are to use your services, we must work quickly. It grows continually more difficult to obtain 
recruits." 

"I don't understand, sir." 

"You were talking to a man on the observation tower, were you not?" 

"Yes. His first name is Jerril. I know no more about him. " 

"His name is nothing. He is an agent of the Commission of Public Safety. He followed you from 
the space-port." 

"But why? I am afraid I am very confused." 

"Did the man on the tower say nothing about me?" 

Gaal hesitated, "He referred to you as Raven Seldon." 



"Did he say why?" 

"He said you predict disaster." 

"I do. What does Trantor mean to you?" 

Everyone seemed to be asking his opinion of Trantor. Gaal felt incapable of response beyond 
the bare word, "Glorious." 

"You say that without thinking. What of psychohistory?" 

"I haven't thought of applying it to the problem." 

"Before you are done with me, young man, you will learn to apply psychohistory to all problems 
as a matter of course. -Observe." Seldon removed his calculator pad from the pouch at his 
belt. Men said he kept one beneath his pillow for use in moments of wakefulness. Its gray, 
glossy finish was slightly worn by use. Seldon's nimble fingers, spotted now with age, played 
along the files and rows of buttons that filled its surface. Red symbols glowed out from the 
upper tier. 

He said, "That represents the condition of the Empire at present." 

He waited. 

Gaal said finally, "Surely that is not a complete representation." 

"No, not complete," said Seldon. "I am glad you do not accept my word blindly. However, this is 
an approximation which will serve to demonstrate the proposition. Will you accept that?" 

"Subject to my later verification of the derivation of the function, yes." Gaal was carefully 
avoiding a possible trap. 

"Good. Add to this the known probability of Imperial assassination, viceregal revolt, the 
contemporary recurrence of periods of economic depression, the declining rate of planetary 
explorations, the. . ." 

He proceeded. As each item was mentioned, new symbols sprang to life at his touch, and 
melted into the basic function which expanded and changed. 

Gaal stopped him only once. "I don't see the validity of that set-transformation." 

Seldon repeated it more slowly. 

Gaal said, "But that is done by way of a forbidden sociooperation." 

"Good. You are quick, but not yet quick enough. It is not forbidden in this connection. Let me do 
it by expansions." 


The procedure was much longer and at its end, Gaal said, humbly, "Yes, I see now." 

Finally, Seldon stopped. "This is Trantor three centuries from now. How do you interpret that? 



Eh?" He put his head to one side and waited. 

Gaal said, unbelievingly, "Total destruction! But - but that is impossible. Trantor has never 
been -" 

Seldon was filled with the intense excitement of a man whose body only had grown old. "Come, 
come. You saw how the result was arrived at. Put it into words. Forget the symbolism for a 
moment." 

Gaal said, "As Trantor becomes more specialized, it be comes more vulnerable, less able to 
defend itself. Further, as it becomes more and more the administrative center of Empire, it 
becomes a greater prize. As the Imperial succession becomes more and more uncertain, and 
the feuds among the great families more rampant, social responsibility disappears. " 

"Enough. And what of the numerical probability of total destruction within three centuries?" 

"I couldn't tell." 

"Surely you can perform a field-differentiation?" 

Gaal felt himself under pressure. He was not offered the calculator pad. It was held a foot from 
his eyes. He calculated furiously and felt his forehead grow slick with sweat. 

He said, "About 85%?" 

"Not bad," said Seldon, thrusting out a lower lip, "but not good. The actual figure is 92.5%." 

Gaal said, "And so you are called Raven Seldon? I have seen none of this in the journals." 

"But of course not. This is unprintable. Do you suppose the Imperium could expose its 
shakiness in this manner. That is a very simple demonstration in psychohistory. But some of 
our results have leaked out among the aristocracy." 

"That's bad." 

"Not necessarily. All is taken into account." 

"But is that why I'm being investigated?" 

"Yes. Everything about my project is being investigated." 

"Are you in danger, sir?"
