"Why so?" 

"Because even Seldon's advanced psychology was limited. It could not handle too many 
independent variables. He couldn't work with individuals over any length of time; any more than 
you could apply kinetic theory of gases to single molecules. He worked with mobs, populations 
of whole planets, and only blind mobs who do not possess foreknowledge of the results of their 
own actions." 

"That's not plain." 

"I can't help it. I'm not psychologist enough to explain it scientifically. But this you know. There 
are no trained psychologists on Terminus and no mathematical texts on the science. It is plain 
that he wanted no one on Terminus capable of working out the future in advance. Seldon 
wanted us to proceed blindly - and therefore correctly - according to the law of mob 
psychology. As I once told you, I never knew where we were heading when I first drove out the 
Anacreonians. My idea had been to maintain balance of power, no more than that. It was only 
afterward that I thought I saw a pattern in events; but I've done my level best not to act on that 
knowledge. Interference due to foresight would have knocked the Plan out of kilter." 



Verisof nodded thoughtfully. "I've heard arguments almost as complicated in the Temples back 
on Anacreon. How do you expect to spot the fight moment of action?" 

"It's spotted already. You admit that once we repair the battle cruiser nothing will stop Wienis 
from attacking us. There will no longer be any alternative in that respect." 

"Yes 

"All right. That accounts for the external aspect. Meanwhile, you'll further admit that the next 
election will see a new and hostile Council that will force action against Anacreon. There is no 
alternative there." 

"Yes." 

"And as soon as all the alternatives disappear, the crisis has come. Just the same - I get 
worried." 

He paused, and Verisof waited. Slowly, almost reluctantly, Hardin continued, "I've got the idea 
-just a notion - that the external and internal pressures were planned to come to a head 
simultaneously. As it is, there's a few months difference. Wienis will probably attack before 
spring, and elections are still a year off." 

"That doesn't sound important." 

"I don't know. It may be due merely to unavoidable errors of calculation, or it might be due to 
the fact that I knew too much. I tried never to let my foresight influence my action, but how can I 
tell? And what effect will the discrepancy have? Anyway," he looked up, "there's one thing I've 
decided." 

"And what's that?" 

"When the crisis does begin to break, I'm going to Anacreon. I want to be on the spot ... Oh, 
that's enough, Verisof. It's getting late. Let's go out and make a night of it. I want some 
relaxation." 


"Then get it right here,' said Verisof. "I don't want to be recognized, or you know what this new 
party your precious Councilmen are forming would say. Call for the brandy." 

And Hardin did - but not for too much. 


3 . 

In the ancient days when the Galactic Empire had embraced the Galaxy, and Anacreon had 
been the richest of the prefects of the Periphery, more than one emperor had visited the 
Viceregal Palace in state. And not one had left without at least one effort to pit his skill with air 
speedster and needle gun against the feathered flying fortress they call the Nyakbird. 

The fame of Anacreon had withered to nothing with the decay of the times. The Viceregal 



Palace was a drafty mass of ruins except for the wing that Foundation workmen had restored. 
And no Emperor had been seen in Anacreon for two hundred years. 

But Nyak hunting was still the royal sport and a good eye with the needle gun still the first 
requirement of Anacreon's kings. 

Lepold I, King of Anacreon and - as was invariably, but untruthfully added - Lord of the Outer 
Dominions, though not yet sixteen had already proved his skill many times over. He had 
brought down his first Nyak when scarcely thirteen; had brought down his tenth the week after 
his accession to the throne; and was returning now from his forty-sixth. 

"Fifty before I come of age," he had exulted. "Who'll take the wager?" 

But Courtiers don't take wagers against the king's skill. There is the deadly danger of winning. 
So no one did, and the king left to change his clothes in high spirits. 

"Lepold!" 

The king stopped mid-step at the one voice that could cause him to do so. He turned sulkily. 
Wienis stood upon the threshold of his chambers and beetled at his young nephew. 

"Send them away," he motioned impatiently. "Get rid of them." 

The king nodded curtly and the two chamberlains bowed and backed down the stairs. Lepold 
entered his uncle's room. 

Wienis stared at the king's hunting suit morosely. "You'll have more important things to tend to 
than Nyak hunting soon enough." 

He turned his back and stumped to his desk. Since he had grown too old for the rush of air, the 
perilous dive within wing-beat of the Nyak, the roll and climb of the speedster at the motion of a 
foot, he had soured upon the whole sport. 

Lepold appreciated his uncle's sour-grapes attitude and it was not without malice that he began 
enthusiastically, "But you should have been with us today, uncle. We flushed one in the wilds of 
Sarnia that was a monster. And game as they come. We had it out for two hours over at least 
seventy square miles of ground. And then I got to Sunwards - he was motioning graphically, as 
though he were once more in his speedster -"and dived torque-wise. Caught him on the rise 
just under the left wing at quarters. It maddened him and he canted athwart. I took his dare and 
veered a-left, waiting for the plummet. Sure enough, down he came. He was within wing-beat 
before I moved and then 

"Lepold!" 

"Well!- I got him." 

"I'm sure you did. Now will you attend?" 

The king shrugged and gravitated to the end table where he nibbled at a Lera nut in quite an 
unregal sulk. He did not dare to meet his uncle's eyes. 



Wienis said, by way of preamble, "I've been to the ship today." 

"What ship?" 

"There is only one ship. The ship. The one the Foundation is repairing for the navy. The old 
Imperial cruiser. Do I make myself sufficiently plain?" 

"That one? You see, I told you the Foundation would repair it if we asked them to. It's all 
poppycock, you know, that story of yours about their wanting to attack us. Because if they did, 
why would they fix the ship? It doesn't make sense, you know." 

"Lepold, you're a fool!" 

The king, who had just discarded the shell of the Lera nut and was lifting another to his lips, 
flushed. 

"Well now, look here," he said, with anger that scarcely rose above peevishness, "I don't think 
you ought to call me that. You forget yourself. I'll be of age in two months, you know." 

"Yes, and you're in a fine position to assume regal responsibilities. If you spent half the time on 
public affairs that you do on Nyak hunting, I'd resign the regency directly with a clear 
conscience." 

"I don't care. That has nothing to do with the case, you know. The fact is that even if you are 
the regent and my uncle, I'm still king and you're still my subject. You oughtn't to call me a fool 
and you oughtn't to sit in my presence, anyway. You haven't asked my permission. I think you 
ought to be careful, or I might do something about it pretty soon." 

Wienis' gaze was cold. "May I refer to you as 'your majesty'?" 

"Yes." 

"Very well! You are a fool, your majesty!" 

His dark eyes blazed from beneath his grizzled brows and the young king sat down slowly. For 
a moment, there was sardonic satisfaction in the regent's face, but it faded quickly. His thick 
lips parted in a smile and one hand fell upon the king's shoulder. 

"Never mind, Lepold. I should not have spoken harshly to you. It is difficult sometimes to 
behave with true propriety when the pressure of events is such as - You understand?" But if 
the words were conciliatory, there was something in his eyes that had not softened. 

Lepold said uncertainly, "Yes. Affairs of State are deuced difficult, you know." He wondered, not 
without apprehension, whether he were not in for a dull siege of meaningless details on the 
year's trade with Smyrno and the long, wrangling dispute over the sparsely settled worlds on 
the Red Corridor. 

Wienis was speaking again. "My boy, I had thought to speak of this to you earlier, and perhaps 
I should have, but I know that your youthful spirits are impatient of the dry detail of statecraft." 

Lepold nodded. "Well, that's all right-"
