Pirenne sneered, "Thanks!" 

And then Hardin said ingenuously: "Could Anacreon supply us with adequate quantities of 
plutonium for our nuclear-power plant? We've only a few years' supply left." 

There was a gasp from Pirenne and then a dead silence for minutes. When Haut Rodric spoke 
it was in a voice quite different from what it had been till then: 

"You have nuclear power?" 

"Certainly. What's unusual in that? I imagine nuclear power is fifty thousand years old now. 

Why shouldn't we have it? Except that it's a little difficult to get plutonium." 

"Yes ... Yes." The envoy paused and added uncomfortably: "Well, gentlemen, we'll pursue the 
subject tomorrow. You'll excuse me-" 

Pirenne looked after him and gritted through his teeth: "That insufferable, dull-witted donkey! 
That-" 

Hardin broke in: "Not at all. He's merely the product of his environment. He doesn't understand 
much except that 'I have a gun and you haven't.’" 

Pirenne whirled on him in exasperation. "What in space did you mean by the talk about military 
bases and tribute? Are you crazy?" 

"No. I merely gave him rope and let him talk. You'll notice that he managed to stumble out with 



Anacreon's real intentions - that is, the parceling up of Terminus into landed estates. Of 
course, I don't intend to let that happen." 

"You don't intend. You don't. And who are you? And may I ask what you meant by blowing off 
your mouth about our nuclear-power plant? Why, it's just the thing that would make us a military 
target." 

"Yes," grinned Hardin. "A military target to stay away from. Isn't it obvious why I brought the 
subject up? It happened to confirm a very strong suspicion I had had." 

"And that was what?" 

"That Anacreon no longer has a nuclear-power economy. If they had, our friend would 
undoubtedly have realized that plutonium, except in ancient tradition is not used in power 
plants. And therefore it follows that the rest of the Periphery no longer has nuclear power either. 
Certainly Smyrno hasn't, or Anacreon wouldn't have won most of the battles in their recent war. 
Interesting, wouldn't you say?" 

"Bah!" Pirenne left in fiendish humor, and Hardin smiled gently. 

He threw his cigar away and looked up at the outstretched Galaxy. "Back to oil and coal, are 
they?" he murmured - and what the rest of his thoughts were he kept to himself. 


3 . 

When Hardin denied owning the Journal, he was perhaps technically correct, but no more. 
Hardin had been the leading spirit in the drive to incorporate Terminus into an autonomous 
municipality-he had been elected its first mayor-so it was not surprising that, though not a 
single share of Journal stock was in his name, some sixty percent was controlled by him in 
more devious fashions. 

There were ways. 

Consequently, when Hardin began suggesting to Pirenne that he be allowed to attend meetings 
of the Board of Trustees, it was not quite coincidence that the Journal began a similar 
campaign. And the first mass meeting in the history of the Foundation was held, demanding 
representation of the City in the "national" government. 

And, eventually, Pirenne capitulated with ill grace. 

Hardin, as he sat at the foot of the table, speculated idly as to just what it was that made 
physical scientists such poor administrators. It might be merely that they were too used to 
inflexible fact and far too unused to pliable people. 

In any case, there was Tomaz Sutt and Jord Fara on his left; Lundin Crast and Yate Fulham on 
his fight; with Pirenne, himself, presiding. He knew them all, of course, but they seemed to have 
put on an extra-special bit of pomposity for the occasion. 

Hardin had dozed through the initial formalities and then perked up when Pirenne sipped at the 



glass of water before him by way of preparation and said: 

"I find it very gratifying to be able to inform the Board that since our last meeting, I have 
received word that Lord Dorwin, Chancellor of the Empire, will arrive at Terminus in two weeks. 
It may be taken for granted that our relations with Anacreon will be smoothed out to our 
complete satisfaction as soon as the Emperor is informed of the situation. " 

He smiled and addressed Hardin across the length of the table. "Information to this effect has 
been given the Journal." 

Hardin snickered below his breath. It seemed evident that Pirenne's desire to strut this 
information before him had been one reason for his admission into the sacrosanctum. 

He said evenly: "Leaving vague expressions out of account, what do you expect Lord Dorwin to 
do?" 

Tomaz Sutt replied. He had a bad habit of addressing one in the third person when in his more 
stately moods. 

"It is quite evident," he observed, "that Mayor Hardin is a professional cynic. He can scarcely 
fail to realize that the Emperor would be most unlikely to allow his personal rights to be 
infringed." 

"Why? What would he do in case they were?" 

There was an annoyed stir. Pirenne said, "You are out of order," and, as an afterthought, "and 
are making what are near-treasonable statements, besides." 

"Am I to consider myself answered?" 

"Yes! If you have nothing further to say-" 

"Don't jump to conclusions. I'd like to ask a question. Besides this stroke of diplomacy - which 
may or may not prove to mean anything - has anything concrete been done to meet the 
Anacreonic menace?" 

Yate Fulham drew one hand along his ferocious red mustache. "You see a menace there, do 
you?" 

"Don't you?" 

"Scarcely"- this with indulgence. "The Emperor-" 

"Great space!" Hardin felt annoyed. "What is this? Every once in a while someone mentions 
'Emperor' or 'Empire' as if it were a magic word. The Emperor is thousands of parsecs away, 
and I doubt whether he gives a damn about us. And if he does, what can he do? What there 
was of the imperial navy in these regions is in the hands of the four kingdoms now and 
Anacreon has its share. Listen, we have to fight with guns, not with words. 

"Now, get this. We've had two months' grace so far, mainly because we've given Anacreon the 
idea that we've got nuclear weapons. Well, we all know that that's a little white lie. We've got 



nuclear power, but only for commercial uses, and darn little at that. They're going to find that 
out soon, and if you think they're going to enjoy being jollied along, you're mistaken." 

"My dear sir-" 

"Hold on: I'm not finished." Hardin was warming up. He liked this. "It's all very well to drag 
chancellors into this, but it would be much nicer to drag a few great big siege guns fitted for 
beautiful nuclear bombs into it. We've lost two months, gentlemen, and we may not have 
another two months to lose. What do you propose to do?" 

Said Lundin Crast, his long nose wrinkling angrily: "If you're proposing the militarization of the 
Foundation, I won't hear a word of it. It would mark our open entrance into the field of politics. 
We, Mr. Mayor, are a scientific foundation and nothing else." 

Added Sutt: "He does not realize, moreover, that building armaments would mean withdrawing 
men - valuable men - from the Encyclopedia. That cannot be done, come what may." 

"Very true," agreed Pirenne. "The Encyclopedia first - always." 

Hardin groaned in spirit. The Board seemed to suffer violently from Encyclopedia on the brain, 

He said icily: "Has it ever occurred to this Board that it is barely possible that Terminus may 
have interests other than the Encyclopedia?" 

Pirenne replied: "I do not conceive, Hardin, that the Foundation can have any interest other 
than the Encyclopedia." 

"I didn't say the Foundation; I said Terminus. I'm afraid you don't understand the situation. 
There's a good million of us here on Terminus, and not more than a hundred and fifty thousand 
are working directly on the Encyclopedia. To the rest of us, this is home. We were born here. 
We're living here. Compared with our farms and our homes and our factories, the Encyclopedia 
means little to us. We want them protected-" 

He was shouted down. 

"The Encyclopedia first," ground out Crast. "We have a mission to fulfill." 

"Mission, hell," shouted Hardin. "That might have been true fifty years ago. But this is a new 
generation." 

"That has nothing to do with it," replied Pirenne. "We are scientists." 

And Hardin leaped through the opening. "Are you, though? That's a nice hallucination, isn't it? 
Your bunch here is a perfect example of what's been wrong with the entire Galaxy for 
thousands of years. What kind of science is it to be stuck out here for centuries classifying the 
work of scientists of the last millennium? Have you ever thought of working onward, extending 
their knowledge and improving upon it? No! You're quite happy to stagnate. The whole Galaxy 
is, and has been for space knows how long. That's why the Periphery is revolting; that's why 
communications are breaking down; that's why petty wars are becoming eternal; that's why 
whole systems are losing nuclear power and going back to barbarous techniques of chemical 
power.
