"Well now, perhaps I won't. Despite your opinion, the dinner is to be on the most lavish scale." 

"Oh, I see." She stared at him contemptuously. "You are very friendly with these barbarians. 
Perhaps that is why I was not to be permitted to attend your conversation. Perhaps your little 



weazened soul is plotting to turn against my father." 

"Not at all." 

"Yes, I'd be likely to believe you, wouldn't I? If ever a poor woman was sacrificed for policy to 
an unsavory marriage, it was myself. I could have picked a more proper man from the alleys 
and mudheaps of my native world." 

"Well, now, I'll tell you what, my lady. Perhaps you would enjoy returning to your native world. 
Except that, to retain as a souvenir that portion of you with which I am best acquainted, I could 
have your tongue cut out first. And," he tolled his head, calculatingly, to one side, "as a final 
improving touch to your beauty, your ears and the tip of your nose as well." 

"You wouldn't dare, you little pug-dog. My father would pulverize your toy nation to meteoric 
dust. In fact, he might do it in any case, if I told him you were treating with these barbarians." 

"Hm-m-m. Well, there's no need for threats. You are free to question the man yourself tonight. 
Meanwhile, madam, keep your wagging tongue still." 

"At your orders?" 

"Here, take this, then, and keep still." 

The band was about her waist and the necklace around her neck. He pushed the knob himself 
and stepped back. 

The Commdora drew in her breath and held out her hands stiffly. She fingered the necklace 
gingerly, and gasped again. 

The Commdor rubbed his hands with satisfaction and said, "You may wear it tonight - and I'll 
get you more. Now keep still." 

The Commdora kept still. 


7 . 

Jaim Twer fidgeted and shuffled his feet. He said, "What's twisting yoi/rface?" 

Hober Mallow lifted out of his brooding, "Is my face twisted? It's not meant so." 

"Something must have happened yesterday, -I mean, besides that feast." With sudden 
conviction, "Mallow, there's trouble, isn't there?" 

"Trouble? No. Quite the opposite. In fact, I'm in the position of throwing my full weight against a 
door and finding it ajar at the time. We're getting into this steel foundry too easily." 

"You suspect a trap?" 

"Oh, for Seldon's sake, don't be melodramatic." Mallow swallowed his impatience and added 
conversationally, "It's just that the easy entrance means there will be nothing to see. 



"Nuclear power, huh?" Twer ruminated. "I'll tell you. There's just about no evidence of any 
nuclear power economy here in Korell. And it would be pretty hard to mask all signs of the 
widespread effects a fundamental technology such as nucleics would have on everything." 

"Not if it was just starting up, Twer, and being applied to a war economy. You'd find it in the 
shipyards and the steel foundries only." 

"So if we don't find it, then-" 

"Then they haven't got it - or they're not showing it. Toss a coin or take a guess." 

Twer shook his head, "I wish I'd been with you yesterday." 

"I wish you had, too," said Mallow stonily. "I have no objection to moral support. Unfortunately, 
it was the Commdor who set the terms of the meeting, and not myself. And what is coming now 
would seem to be the royal groundcar to escort us to the foundry. Have you got the gadgets?" 


"All of them." 


8 . 

The foundry was large, and bore the odor of decay which no amount of superficial repairs could 
quite erase. It was empty now and in quite an unnatural state of quiet, as it played 
unaccustomed host to the Commdor and his court. 

Mallow had swung the steel sheet onto the two supports with a careless heave. He had taken 
the instrument held out to him by Twer and was gripping the leather handle inside its leaden 
sheath. 

"The instrument," he said, "is dangerous, but so is a buzz saw. You just have to keep your 
fingers away." 

And as he spoke, he drew the muzzle-slit swiftly down the length of the steel sheet, which 
quietly and instantly fell in two. 

There was a unanimous jump, and Mallow laughed. He picked up one of the halves and 
propped it against his knee, "You can adjust the cutting-length accurately to a hundredth of an 
inch, and a two-inch sheet will slit down the middle as easily as this thing did. If you've got the 
thickness exactly judged, you can place steel on a wooden table, and split the metal without 
scratching the wood." 

And at each phrase, the nuclear shear moved and a gouged chunk of steel flew across the 
room. 

"That," he said, "is whittling - with steel." 

He passed back the shear. "Or else you have the plane. Do you want to decrease the thickness 
of a sheet, smooth out an irregularity, remove corrosion? Watch!" 



Thin, transparent foil flew off the other half of the original sheet in six-inch swarths, then 
eight-inch, then twelve. 

"Or drills? It's all the same principle." 

They were crowded around now. It might have been a sleight-of-hand show, a comer magician, 
a vaudeville act made into high-pressure salesmanship. Commdor Asper fingered scraps of 
steel. High officials of the government tiptoed over each other's shoulders, and whispered, 
while Mallow punched clean, beautiful round holes through an inch of hard steel at every touch 
of his nuclear drill. 

"Just one more demonstration. Bring two short lengths of pipe, somebody." 

An Honorable Chamberlain of something-or-other sprang to obedience in the general 
excitement and thought-absorption, and stained his hands like any laborer. 

Mallow stood them upright and shaved the ends off with a single stroke of the shear, and then 
joined the pipes, fresh cut to fresh cut. 

And there was a single pipe! The new ends, with even atomic irregularities missing, formed one 
piece upon joining. 

Then Mallow looked up at his audience, stumbled at his first word and stopped. There was the 
keen stirring of excitement in his chest, and the base of his stomach went tingly and cold. 

The Commdor's own bodyguard, in the confusion, had struggled to the front line, and Mallow, 
for the first time, was near enough to see their unfamiliar hand-weapons in detail. 

They were nuclear! There was no mistaking it; an explosive projectile weapon with a barrel like 
that was impossible. But that wasn't the big point. That wasn't the point at all. 

The butts of those weapons had, deeply etched upon them, in worn gold plating, the 
Spaceship-and-Sun! 

The same Spaceship-and-Sun that was stamped on every, one of the great volumes of the 
original Encyclopedia that the Foundation had begun and not yet finished. The same 
Spaceship-and-Sun that had blazoned the banner of the Galactic Empire through millennia. 

Mallow talked through and around his thoughts, "Test that pipe! It's one piece. Not perfect; 
naturally, the joining shouldn't be done by hand." 

There was no need of further legerdemain. It had gone over. Mallow was through. He had what 
he wanted. There was only one thing in his mind. The golden globe with its conventionalized 
rays, and the oblique cigar shape that was a space vessel. 

The Spaceship-and-Sun of the Empire! 

The Empire! The words drilled! A century and a half had passed but there was still the-Empire, 
somewhere deeper in the Galaxy. And it was emerging again, out into the Periphery. 


Mallow smiled! 



9 . 


The Far Star was two days out in space, when Hober Mallow, in his private quarters with Senior 
Lieutenant Drawt, handed him an envelope, a roll of microfilm, and a silvery spheroid. 

"As of an hour from now, Lieutenant, you're Acting Captain of the Far Star, until I return, -or 
forever." 

Drawt made a motion of standing but Mallow waved him down imperiously. 

"Quiet, and listen. The envelope contains the exact location of the planet to which you're to 
proceed. There you will wait for me for two months. If, before the two months are up, the 
Foundation locates you, the microfilm is my report of the trip. 

"If, however," and his voice was somber, "I do not return at the end of two months, and 
Foundation vessels do not locate you, proceed to the planet, Terminus, and hand in the Time 
Capsule as the report. Do you understand that?" 

"Yes, sir." 

"At no time are you, or any of the men, to amplify in any single instance, my official report." 

"If we are questioned, sir?" 

"Then you know nothing." 

"Yes, sir." 

The interview ended, and fifty minutes later, a lifeboat kicked lightly off the side of the Far Star. 


10 . 

Onum Barr was an old man, too old to be afraid. Since the last disturbances, he had lived alone 
on the fringes of the land with what books he had saved from the ruins. Fie had nothing he 
feared losing, least of all the worn remnant of his life, and so he faced the intruder without 
cringing.
