It was past eleven. Hardin fidgeted and stood on his toes to better his view. He resisted an 
impulse to stand on a chair. And then he saw Wienis threading through the crowd toward him 
and he relaxed. 

Wienis' progress was slow. At almost every step, he had to pass a kindly sentence with some 
revered noble whose grandfather had helped Lepold's grandfather brigandize the kingdom and 
had received a dukedom therefor. 

And then he disentangled himself from the last uniformed peer and reached Hardin. His smile 
crooked itself into a smirk and his black eyes peered from under grizzled brows with glints of 
satisfaction in them. 

"My dear Hardin," he said, in a low voice, "you must expect to be bored, when you refuse to 
announce your identity." 

"I am not bored, your highness. This is all extremely interesting. We have no comparable 
spectacles on Terminus, you know." 

"No doubt. But would you care to step into my private chambers, where we can speak at 
greater length and with considerably more privacy?" 

"Certainly." 

With arms linked, the two ascended the staircase, and more than one dowager duchess stared 
after them in surprise and wondered at the identity of this insignificantly dressed and 
uninteresting-looking stranger on whom such signal honor was being conferred by the prince 
regent. 

In Wienis' chambers, Hardin relaxed in perfect comfort and accepted with a murmur of gratitude 
the glass of liquor that had been poured out by the regent's own hand. 

"Locris wine, Hardin," said Wienis, "from the royal cellars. The real thing - two centuries in age. 
It was laid down ten years before the Zeonian Rebellion." 

"A really royal drink," agreed Hardin, politely. "To Lepold I, King of Anacreon." 

They drank, and Wienis added blandly, at the pause, "And soon to be Emperor of the 



Periphery, and further, who knows? The Galaxy may some day be reunited." 

"Undoubtedly. By Anacreon?" 

"Why not? With the help of the Foundation, our scientific superiority over the rest of the 
Periphery would be undisputable." 

Hardin set his empty glass down and said, "Well, yes, except that, of course, the Foundation is 
bound to help any nation that requests scientific aid of it. Due to the high idealism of our 
government and the great moral purpose of our founder, Hari Seldon, we are unable to play 
favorites. That can't be helped, your highness." 

Wienis' smile broadened. "The Galactic Spirit, to use the popular cant, helps those who help 
themselves. I quite understand that, left to itself, the Foundation would never cooperate." 

"I wouldn't say that. We repaired the Imperial cruiser for you, though my board of navigation 
wished it for themselves for research purposes." 

The regent repeated the last words ironically. "Research purposes! Yes! Yet you would not 
have repaired it, had I not threatened war." 

Hardin made a deprecatory gesture. "I don't know." 

"I do. And that threat always stood." 

"And still stands now?" 

"Now it is rather too late to speak of threats." Wienis had cast a rapid glance at the clock on his 
desk. "Look here, Hardin, you were on Anacreon once before. You were young then; we were 
both young. But even then we had entirely different ways of looking at things. You're what they 
call a man of peace, aren't you?" 

"I suppose I am. At least, I consider violence an uneconomical way of attaining an end. There 
are always better substitutes, though they may sometimes be a little less direct." 

"Yes. I've heard of your famous remark: 'Violence is the last refuge of the incompetent.' And 
yet" - the regent scratched one ear gently in affected abstraction -"I wouldn't call myself 
exactly incompetent." 

Hardin nodded politely and said nothing. 

"And in spite of that," Wienis continued, "I have always believed in direct action. I have believed 
in carving a straight path to my objective and following that path. I have accomplished much 
that way, and fully expect to accomplish still more." 

"I know," interrupted Hardin. "I believe you are carving a path such as you describe for yourself 
and your children that leads directly to the throne, considering the late unfortunate death of the 
king's father - your elder brother and the king's own precarious state of health. He is in a 
precarious state of health, is he not?" 

Wienis frowned at the shot, and his voice grew harder. "You might find it advisable, Hardin, to 
avoid certain subjects. You may consider yourself privileged as mayor of Terminus to make ... 



uh ... injudicious remarks, but if you do, please disabuse yourself of the notion. I am not one to 
be frightened at words. It has been my philosophy of life that difficulties vanish when faced 
boldly, and I have never turned my back upon one yet." 

"I don't doubt that. What particular difficulty are you refusing to turn your back upon at the 
present moment?" 

"The difficulty, Hardin, of persuading the Foundation to co-operate. Your policy of peace, you 
see, has led you into making several very serious mistakes, simply because you 
underestimated the boldness of your adversary. Not everyone is as afraid of direct action as 
you are." 

"For instance?" suggested Hardin. 

"For instance, you came to Anacreon alone and accompanied me to my chambers alone." 
Hardin looked about him. "And what is wrong with that?" 

"Nothing," said the regent, "except that outside this room are five police guards, well armed and 
ready to shoot. I don't think you can leave, Hardin." 

The mayor's eyebrows lifted, "I have no immediate desire to leave. Do you then fear me so 
much?" 

"I don't fear you at all. But this may serve to impress you with my determination. Shall we call it 
a gesture?" 

"Call it what you please," said Hardin, indifferently. "I shall not discommode myself over the 
incident, whatever you choose to call it." 

"I'm sure that attitude will change with time. But you have made another error, Hardin, a more 
serious one. It seems that the planet Terminus is almost wholly undefended." 

"Naturally. What have we to fear? We threaten no one's interest and serve all alike." 

"And while remaining helpless," Wienis went on, "you kindly helped us to arm ourselves, aiding 
us particularly in the development of a navy of our own, a great navy. In fact, a navy which, 
since your donation of the Imperial cruiser, is quite irresistible." 

"Your highness, you are wasting time." Hardin made as if to rise from his seat. "If you mean to 
declare war, and are informing me of the fact, you will allow me to communicate with my 
government at once." 

"Sit down, Hardin. I am not declaring war, and you are not communicating with your 
government at all. When the war is fought - not declared, Hardin, fought - the Foundation will 
be informed of it in due time by the nuclear blasts of the Anacreonian navy under the lead of my 
own son upon the flagship, Wienis, once a cruiser of the Imperial navy." 

Hardin frowned. "When will all this happen?" 

"If you're really interested, the ships of the fleet left Anacreon exactly fifty minutes ago, at 



eleven, and the first shot will be fired as soon as they sight Terminus, which should be at noon 
tomorrow. You may consider yourself a prisoner of war." 

"That's exactly what I do consider myself, your highness," said Hardin, still frowning. "But I'm 
disappointed." 

Wienis chuckled contemptuously. "Is that all?" 

"Yes. I had thought that the moment of coronation - midnight, you know - would be the logical 
time to set the fleet in motion. Evidently, you wanted to start the war while you were still regent. 
It would have been more dramatic the other way." 

The regent stared. "What in Space are you talking about?" 

"Don't you understand?" said Hardin, softly. "I had set my counterstroke for midnight." 

Wienis started from his chair. "You are not bluffing me. There is no counterstroke. If you are 
counting on the support of the other kingdoms, forget it. Their navies, combined, are no match 
for ours." 

"I know that. I don't intend firing a shot. It is simply that the word went out a week ago that at 
midnight tonight, the planet Anacreon goes under the interdict." 

"The interdict?" 

"Yes. If you don't understand, I might explain that every priest in Anacreon is going on strike, 
unless I countermand the order. But I can't while I'm being held incommunicado; nor do I wish 
to even if I weren't!" He leaned forward and added, with sudden animation, "Do you realize, 
your highness, that an attack on the Foundation is nothing short of sacrilege of the highest 
order?" 

Wienis was groping visibly for self-control. "Give me none of that, Hardin. Save it for the mob." 

"My dear Wienis, whoever do you think I am saving it for? I imagine that for the last half hour 
every temple on Anacreon has been the center of a mob listening to a priest exhorting them 
upon that very subject. There's not a man or woman on Anacreon that doesn't know that their 
government has launched a vicious, unprovoked attack upon the center of their religion. But it 
lacks only four minutes of midnight now. You'd better go down to the ballroom to watch events. 
I'll be safe here with five guards outside the door." He leaned back in his chair, helped himself 
to another glass of Locris wine, and gazed at the ceiling with perfect indifference.
