Wienis suddenly furious, rushed out of the room. 

A hush had fallen over the elite in the ballroom, as a broad path was cleared for the throne. 
Lepold sat on it now, hands solidly on its arms, head high, face frozen. The huge chandeliers 
had dimmed and in the diffused multi-colored light from the tiny nucleo-bulbs that bespangled 
the vaulted ceiling, the royal aura shone out bravely, lifting high above his head to form a 
blazing coronet. 

Wienis paused on the stairway. No one saw him; all eyes were on the throne. He clenched his 
fists and remained where he was; Hardin would not bluff him into action. 



And then the throne stiffed. Noiselessly, it lifted upward - and drifted. Off the dais, slowly down 
the steps, and then horizontally, five centimetres off the floor, it worked itself toward the huge, 
open window. 

At the sound of the deep-toned bell that signified midnight, it stopped before the window - and 
the king's aura died. 

For a frozen split second, the king did not move, face twisted in surprise, without an aura, 
merely human; and then the throne wobbled and dropped to the floor with a crashing thump, 
just as every light in the palace went out. 

Through the shrieking din and confusion, Wienis' bull voice sounded. "Get the flares! Get the 
flares!" 

He buffeted right and left through the crowd and forced his way to the door. From without, 
palace guards had streamed into the darkness. 

Somehow the flares were brought back to the ballroom; flares that were to have been used in 
the gigantic torchlight procession through the streets of the city after the coronation. 

Back to the ballroom guardsmen swarmed with torches - blue, green, and red; where the 
strange light lit up frightened, confused faces. 

"There is no harm done," shouted Wienis. "Keep your places. Power will return in a moment." 
He turned to the captain of the guard who stood stiffly at attention. "What is it, Captain?" 

"Your highness," was the instant response, "the palace is surrounded by the people of the city." 
"What do they want?" snarled Wienis. 

"A priest is at the head. He has been identified as High Priest Poly Verisof. He demands the 
immediate release of Mayor Salvor Hardin and cessation of the war against the Foundation." 
The report was made in the expressionless tones of an officer, but his eyes shifted uneasily. 

Wienis cried, "if any of the rabble attempt to pass the palace gates, blast them out of existence. 
For the moment, nothing more. Let them howl! There will be an accounting tomorrow." 

The torches had been distributed now, and the ballroom was again alight. Wienis rushed to the 
throne, still standing by the window, and dragged the stricken, wax-faced Lepold to his feet. 

"Come with me." He cast one look out of the window. The city was pitch-black. From below 
there were the hoarse confused cries of the mob. Only toward the fight, where the Argolid 
Temple stood was there illumination. He swore angrily, and dragged the king away. 

Wienis burst into his chambers, the five guardsmen at his heels. Lepold followed, wide-eyed, 
scared speechless. 

"Hardin," said Wienis, huskily, "you are playing with forces too great for you." 

The mayor ignored the speaker. In the pearly light of the pocket nucleo-bulb at his side, he 



remained quietly seated, a slightly ironic smile on his face. 

"Good morning, your majesty," he said to Lepold. "I congratulate you on your coronation." 
"Hardin," cried Wienis again, "order your priests back to their jobs." 

Hardin looked up coolly. "Order them yourself, Wienis, and see who is playing with forces too 
great for whom. Right now, there's not a wheel turning in Anacreon. There's not a light burning, 
except in the temples. There's not a drop of water running, except in the temples. On the wintry 
half of the planet, there's not a calorie of heat, except in the temples. The hospitals are taking in 
no more patients. The power plants have shut down. All ships are grounded. If you don't like it, 
Wienis, you can order the priests back to their jobs. I don't wish to." 

"By Space, Hardin, I will. If it's to be a showdown, so be it. We'll see if your priests can 
withstand the army. Tonight, every temple on the planet will be put under army supervision." 

"Very good, but how are you going to give the orders? Every line of communication on the 
planet is shut down. You'll find that neither wave nor hyperwave will work. In fact, the only 
communicator of the planet that will work - outside of the temples, of course - is the televisor 
right here in this room, and I've fitted it only for reception." 

Wienis struggled vainly for breath, and Hardin continued, "If you wish you can order your army 
into the Argolid Temple just outside the palace and then use the ultrawave sets there to contact 
other portions of the planet. But if you do that, I'm afraid the army contigent will be cut to pieces 
by the mob, and then what will protect your palace, Wienis? And your lives, Wienis?" 

Wienis said thickly, "We can hold out, devil. We'll last the day. Let the mob howl and let the 
power die, but we'll hold out. And when the news comes back that the Foundation has been 
taken, your precious mob will find upon what vacuum their religion has been built, and they'll 
desert your priests and turn against them. I give you until noon tomorrow, Hardin, because you 
can stop the power on Anacreon but you can't stop my fleet. " His voice croaked exultantly. 
"They're on their way, Hardin, with the great cruiser you yourself ordered repaired, at the head." 

Hardin replied lightly. "Yes, the cruiser I myself ordered repaired - but in my own way. Tell me, 
Wienis, have you ever heard of a hyperwave relay? No, I see you haven't. Well, in about two 
minutes you'll find out what one can do." 

The televisor flashed to life as he spoke, and he amended, "No, in two seconds. Sit down, 
Wienis. and listen." 


7 . 

Theo Aporat was one of the very highest ranking priests of Anacreon. From the standpoint of 
precedence alone, he deserved his appointment as head priest- attendant upon the flagship 
Wienis. 


But it was not only rank or precedence. He knew the ship. He had worked directly under the 
holy men from the Foundation itself in repairing the ship. He had gone over the motors under 



their orders. He had rewired the 'visors; revamped the communications system; replated the 
punctured hull; reinforced the beams. He had even been permitted to help while the wise men 
of the Foundation had installed a device so holy it had never been placed in any previous ship, 
but had been reserved only for this magnificent colossus of a vessel - a hyperwave relay. 

It was no wonder that he felt heartsick over the purposes to which the glorious ship was 
perverted. He had never wanted to believe what Verisof had told him - that the ship was to be 
used for appalling wickedness; that its guns were to be turned on the great Foundation. Turned 
on that Foundation, where he had been trained as a youth, from which all blessedness was 
derived. 

Yet he could not doubt now, after what the admiral had told him. 

How could the king, divinely blessed, allow this abominable act? Or was it the king? Was it not, 
perhaps, an action of the accursed regent, Wienis, without the knowledge of the king at all. And 
it was the son of this same Wienis that was the admiral who five minutes before had told him: 

"Attend to your souls and your blessings, priest. I will attend to my ship." 

Aporat smiled crookedly. He would attend to his souls and his blessings - and also to his 
cursings; and Prince Lefkin would whine soon enough. 

He had entered the general communications room now. His. acolyte preceded him and the two 
officers in charge made no move to interfere. The head priest-attendant had the right of free 
entry anywhere on the ship. 

"Close the door," Aporat ordered, and looked at the chronometer. It lacked Five minutes of 
twelve. He had timed it well. 

With quick practiced motions, he moved the little levers that opened all communications, so that 
every part of the two-mile-long ship was within reach of his voice and his image. 

"Soldiers of the royal flagship Wienis, attend! It is your priest-attendant that speaks!" The sound 
of his voice reverberated, he knew, from the stem atom blast in the extreme rear to the 
navigation tables in the prow. 

"Your ship," he cried, "is engaged in sacrilege. Without your knowledge, it is performing such 
an act as will doom the soul of every man among you to the eternal frigidity of space! Listen! It 
is the intention of your commander to take this ship to the Foundation and there to bombard 
that source of all blessings into submission to his sinful will. And since that is his intention, I, in 
the name of the Galactic Spirit, remove him from his command, for there is no command where 
the blessing of the Galactic Spirit has been withdrawn. The divine king himself may not 
maintain his kingship without the consent of the Spirit."
